# Layout

In normal document flow, elements are stacked from top to bottom in the order that they appear in the HTML.

However, elements can change behavior using things like the position, and the display properties. You can also use a property called float.

## Floating Content

Using float causes elements to be stacked next to each other instead of on top on one another.

It is time to look at some code. Consider the following CSS and HTML code that are not using float:

```css
p {
  width: 200px;
  padding: 10px;
}
```

```html
<p>
  Programming involves activities such as; analysis, developing understanding,
  generating algorithms, verification of requirements of algorithms including
  their correctness and resources consumption, and implementation of algorithms
  in a target programming language.
</p>
<div>
  The source code is written in one or more programming languages. The purpose
  of programming is to find a sequence of instructions that will automate
  performing a specific task or solve a given problem.
</div>
```

Programming involves activities such as; analysis, developing understanding, generating algorithms, verification of requirements of algorithms including their correctness and resources consumption, and implementation of algorithms in a target programming language.

The source code is written in one or more programming languages. The purpose of programming is to find a sequence of instructions that will automate performing a specific task or solve a given problem.

Now WITH float:

p {
width: 200px;
padding: 10px;
float: left;
}
div {
width: 200px;
padding: 10px;
float: right;
}

<p>
 Programming involves activities such as analysis; developing understanding, generating algorithms, verification of requirements of algorithms including their correctness and resources consumption, and implementation of algorithms in a target programming language.
</p>
<div>
  The source code is written in one or more programming languages. The purpose of programming is to find a sequence of instructions that will automate performing a specific task or solve a given problem.
</div>
Programming involves activities such as; analysis, developing understanding, generating algorithms, verification of requirements of algorithms including their correctness and resources consumption, and implementation of algorithms in a target programming language.The source code is written in one or more programming languages. The purpose of programming is to find a sequence of instructions that will automate performing a specific task or solve a given problem.

You can see that you are now able to display the content in columns stacked next to each other. This technique gives you a great deal of flexibility in laying out the content on the page.

Phew! You've made it through CSS!

Additional Info!
If you would like more practice, please check out this website: Flukeout.github.io. It is a CSS game that enforces everything you have learned. Have fun!

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.
