# Objects

Objects, like arrays, may contain many values. To create an object, you define what the properties are and set their corresponding values. You can think of a JavaScript object as the same as a real-life object. Consider an object like a vehicle. The vehicle has different properties such as the make, model, weight, color, number of doors and so on. If you wanted to show this vehicle object as a JavaScript object, you would do so as shown below:

```js
var vehicle = {
  make: "Toyota",
  model: "Tacoma",
  weightInPounds: 3980,
  color: "Red",
  numberOfDoors: 4,
  fourWheelDrive: true,
};
```

Above, there is an object named vehicle. Within this object are several properties that are set to specific values. Three of the values are strings, two of the values are numbers, and one is a boolean. The syntax for properties and values will always be property:value with a comma separating each property and value pair.

When using objects, you can access individual properties by using the following syntax: objectName.propertyName. So, if you wanted to see just the weight of the vehicle, then you would do so with vehicle.weightInPounds.

Objects are used very frequently in JavaScript, so be sure you understand the syntax of how to create an object.

Arrays vs. Objects
Both JavaScript arrays and objects may contain multiple values. So what's the difference?

Arrays are typically used to store a collection of the same type of items. For instance, earlier you saw an example of an array colors that contained multiple color values (as strings). If you had several school classes you were taking, they could all be stored in an array. Arrays are ordered lists, and each item of an array has a numerical position (referred to as an index): The first item has an index of 0, the second item in the array has an index of 1, and so on. You will learn more about this soon.

Objects, on the other hand, are typically used to store multiple values for a single item. In the example above, you saw many properties for the vehicle object — each property has a value specific to that vehicle. If you needed to store multiple vehicle objects, each with their own set of properties, you would use an array.

It is helpful to think of Objects as Arrays with each value having a named index instead of an numerical index. If we tried to declare the same vehicle above as an array it might look something like this:

```js
var vehicle = ["Toyota", "Tacoma", 3980, "Red", 4, true];
```

It's much harder to understand what each value represents using just an array to hold this data. However if you look at the object definition of vehicle earlier, since each value has a named index, it's much easier to understand what each value is for.

```js
var vehicle = {
  make: "Toyota",
  model: "Tacoma",
  weightInPounds: 3980,
  color: "Red",
  numberOfDoors: 4,
  fourWheelDrive: true,
};
```

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Next](./5.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./3.md)
