# Border Width and Color Properties

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293069024.hd.mp4?s=2df9e29afe1a2ca94febb9dbd5579ce5f6122b46&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Border-Width
The border-width property specifies the width of the border area. You can define the thickness using a keyword such as thin, medium and thick, or you can set the size using px or em. Also, you can define the border-style property and then define how thick you would like the value to be. See below:

p {
border-style: solid;
border-width: 20px;
}
The output of the above would be:

A solid border with a width of 20 pixels

Again, you can set the width of the border moving from top to the left side of the border, just like you did with border-style. Consider below:

p {
border-style: solid;
border-width: medium 12px thick 16px;
}
The above code is saying the top of the border is medium, the right side is 12px, the bottom is thick and the left side is 16px. The output will be:

A mixed border

Tip!
If the value for the border-width property is missing or not specified, the default value of the border-width property, medium, will be used instead.

Border-Color
The border-color property specifies the color of the box's border. This property is used in the same way as the color property as you can use predefined colors or hex codes to populate the color desired. This property can be used to define all sides or each side individually from the top side to the left side. Below, there is a dashed border with a color of red.

p {
border-style: dashed;
border-color: red;
}
This is a paragraph with a red border

### Try It!

Throughout these examples, copy and paste the code into your `index.ts` file, and then feel free to test and change it as you learn more.

## Add Types to Variables Example

The code below shows three different variables: `sandwich`, `orderNumber`, and `delicious`. Each variable has a different type: `string`, `number` and `boolean`, respectively.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
const sandwich: string = "BLT"; // string
const orderNumber: number = 1738; // number
const delicious: boolean = true; // boolean
```

- Above, the types are defined after the variable name. To define a type, write the variable name, include a colon (`:`) after the variable name, and finally, include the type needed for that variable.

## Add Types to Functions Example

The same principle can be applied to functions as well. You can not only apply a `type declaration` to the parameters of the function, but the `return value` of the function itself.

Consider the function below:

**index.ts** file:

```ts
function orderFood(sandwich: string, orderNumber: number): void {
  console.log(
    "Your order number is " +
      orderNumber +
      " and contains a " +
      sandwich +
      " sandwich"
  );
}

orderFood("Ham & Cheese", 32);
```

- First, the function is defined by the `function` keyword and is named `orderFood`.
- Next, the `parameters` are defined within the parenthesis `()`. There are two parameters defined: `sandwich` and `orderNumber`.
- - Each parameter has a type defined: `sandwich` is of type `string`, and `orderNumber` is of type `number`.
- Third, after the `parameters`, the `type` of the function is defined as `void`.
- - The syntax `: void` is located after the parenthesis that holds the `parameters` and before the curly brackets `{}`.
    In this case, the function does not return anything except for a console.log, so the type is void.
    console.log itself does not have a type of anything, which is why the function is returning a type of void.
    Lastly, there is a console.log which sends a message to the console including both of the parameters.
    Because TypeScript is compiled down to JavaScript, the types are removed. Be sure to add the function above and function call into your index.ts file, save the file, and run npm start. Once you have done that, two things should happen: you should see the message from the console.log, and the index.js file has been compiled. Open the index.js file, and you will see the following.

index.js file:

'use strict';
function orderFood(sandwich, orderNumber) {
console.log('Your order number is ' + orderNumber + ' and contains a ' + sandwich + ' sandwich');
}
orderFood('Ham & Cheese', 32);
The comparison between the two files is shown below:

functionsFigure 1-3: Functions

And within your command prompt/terminal, you should see the message from the console.log, as shown below:

[Next](./7.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./6.md)
