# Output Device

Output Devices

Output. Authored by Steve Bowbrick, License: CC BY 2.0
An output device allows a user to observe the results of computer processing with one or more senses.

Output devices communicate the results of processing to the computer user. Output devices are evaluated by the efficiency and effectiveness with which they communicate different types of information in different types of environments. A good output device delivers information—visual, audio, or other—in a manner that allows the information to be interpreted easily and, in some situations, enjoyably.

Computer output consists of the results of processing produced in a manner that is observable by human senses or that can be used as input into another system. Output can be visual (on a display or printed page) or audio (through speakers or headphones). In the case of virtual reality systems, output can even be tactile and olfactory to recreate realistic environments. High-quality output can provide realistic impressions. Telepresence uses large high-def displays and surround sound to allow individuals to meet around a virtual conference table and hold meaningful remote discussions without the need for travel.

Output from one system can be provided to another system as input. For example, a smartphone can be used as a remote control for a television, and a GPS navigation system can be used to control an auto-pilot system on an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV).

Display
A display provides visual computer output for observation on a monitor or screen.

The most common form of computer output is visual on a display. There is a wide assortment of displays and display technologies, each designed to provide an appropriate quality image for specific environments and applications. From checkout counter displays to high-def television displays, from small smartphone displays to jumbo LCD displays at stadiums, displays are an ever-increasing part of our daily lives.

Remarkable progress has been made with display screens (sometimes called monitors), including those used with personal computers. With today’s wide selection of monitors and displays, price and overall quality can vary tremendously. The table below lists the primary types of display technologies used today.

The first consideration when selecting a display is typically size, measured diagonally, from corner to opposite corner, across the screen. Many sizes are available to meet every computing and media need. Smartphone displays range roughly from 3 to 5 inches; tablets and ebook readers from 5 to 10 inches; 11 to 17 inches for laptop computers; and 17 to 27 or more inches for desktop displays.

There are several types of display technologies in use today (listed in the table at the bottom of this page). Most computers use LCD (liquid crystal display) technology, although LED (light-emitting diode) and OLED (organic LED) are becoming more common on high-end laptop PCs. The trend has been toward technologies that provide clearer, crisper images that require less power. Perhaps the only exceptions to this trend are ebooks. The original ebook reader, the Kindle, sacrificed image quality for lower power consumption. The e-ink displays used in the early ebook readers do not use a backlight, are easy to read in outdoor light, and provide a monochrome image that is ideal for displaying the pages of a book.

Traditional computer displays use a 4:3 format: four units wide and three units tall. More recently, a widescreen format has become popular that uses either a 16:9 or 16:10 ratio. Widescreen formats are used by motion pictures and are also handy for viewing documents side-by-side on the display.

The quality of a display image is often measured in pixels—picture elements that combine to form an image on a display. Display resolution is a measure, in width by height, of the number of pixels on the screen. Display resolutions range from 1334 by 750 for an iPhone 7, to 2880 by 1800 for a 15″ laptop display, to 3840 by 2160 resolution for a top-of-the-line 78″ 4K Ultra HD Smart TV, to 5120 by 2880 for a top-of-the-line 27″ desktop computer display. Note that the 27″ desktop display actually has a higher resolution than the 78″ HD TV, which works well because the audience is sitting much farther back from the TV than the computer user is sitting from the display.

A video card (graphics card) controls the video output for computers. These circuit boards combine video processing and storage onto an expansion card or integrate them onto the motherboard to manage video images for display. Today’s high-end graphics cards include a graphics processing unit (GPU) to process the graphics and take the load off the CPU.

They also include video memory, video BIOS, and a RAM digital-to-analog converter or RAMDAC. Support for special 3D processing in high resolution and highly detailed colors and shading may also be included. The quality of the graphics card has a big impact on the virtual environments of computer games.

Today’s display technologies offer many options for televisions as well as computers. High definition TV (HDTV) delivers a resolution of 1920×1080p, called 1080p, that is more than twice that of traditional television displays for sharper, crisper images.

HDTV uses a widescreen format, which means it uses the same height and width ratio used in movie theaters. HDTVs have begun using OLED technology to produce even sharper images with deeper blacks on large displays that consume less power than plasma or LCD TVs. The latest TV display technology is called Ultra HDTV (UHDTV) or 4K for short since it delivers roughly 4,000 horizontal pixels (3840 x 2160 to be precise), that’s twice as many pixels delivered by 1080p high-def.

3D displays use polarization technologies that generally require the viewer to wear special glasses to experience the 3D effect. These displays add depth and realism to sports, movies, and computer games. Content providers are working hard to create content that takes advantage of 3D displays. Manufacturers are working to refine 3D technologies so that viewers need not wear special glasses. 3D displays have also been used for handheld games, smartphones, and computer displays.

While 3D televisions aren’t selling as manufacturers had hoped, virtual reality (VR) systems sales are increasing significantly. VR systems use headset displays that place the wearer right in the middle of the action. Augmented reality uses glasses that allow the wearer to see the real world with computer-generated objects overlaid across the scene.

Display Technologies
Technology Description
Liquid crystal display (LCD) A thin, flat display that uses liquid crystal—an organic, oil-like material—placed between two pieces of glass to form characters and graphics images on a backlit screen. LCDs are popular for all types of personal computers and televisions.
Plasma display A thin, flat display that uses plasma gas between two flat panels to excite phosphors and create light. Plasma displays are used primarily for televisions and compete head-to-head with LCD in that market.
Light-emitting diode (LED) display A thin, flat display that utilizes LEDs to provide the backlight for the display rather than the fluorescent light used in traditional LCDs. LED is gaining in popularity as a green technology that uses less energy, does not require the use of mercury in its production, and presents a bright, brilliant image.
Electronic paper (e-paper) A technology that does not use backlighting like other display technologies but instead uses pixels made of particles or oils that reflect light to more closely resemble the pages of a book. E-paper requires less energy and is easier to see in outdoor lighting but is impossible to read in the dark. E-paper is used for ebook readers like the Kindle, although some more recent ebook readers use color LED displays.
Flexible display Samsung and others are working on delivering flexible displays that provide color images on a flexible film of plastic. The new technology not only provides some interesting new display applications but also provides us with displays that won’t shatter if you drop them.
Cathode ray tube (CRT) display Deep, relatively bulky display that uses a large vacuum tube in which an electron gun shoots an electron beam rapidly across a fluorescent screen to create moving images. CRT displays have effectively been replaced by thin display technologies.
Head-up display (HUD) UA transparent display that presents data as a layer on top of a normal field of view. Used by fighter pilots, and more recently by the general population with the release of Google Glass, a glasses-mounted display, and Microsoft HoloLens.
Virtual reality (VR) headset A headset strapped over the head covering the eyes with a box containing two displays (one for each eye) that provide a 3D view of a virtual world that can be navigated with hand controls and viewed by rotating the head.
LCD projector LCD projectors are designed to project presentations from your computer onto a larger screen. Typically costing thousands of dollars, these portable devices are a must-have item for business people who make presentations to large audiences.

# Printers

Printers - Another Output Device

Printer. Authored by: projectidea, License: CC BY 2.0
A printer is an output device dedicated to providing computer output printed on paper.

Computer users often wish to create printed copies of the work they’ve created. It may be an output that is as simple as a grocery list, or it may be something as serious as a work of art ready for framing. There are many types of printers that provide varying quality of paper-based output, as well as specialized printers that produce three-dimensional output.

A useful and popular form of output is called hard copy, which is paper output from a printer. A variety of printers with different speeds, features, and capabilities are available.

The speed of a printer is typically measured by the number of pages printed per minute (ppm). The quality of resolution of printers is similar to the resolution of displays. A printer’s output resolution depends on the number of dots printed per inch (dpi). A printer with a 600 dots-per-inch (dpi)resolution prints more clearly than one with a 300-dpi resolution. When shopping for a printer, consider the quality of the output (judged by resolution specs and personal evaluation of the printed copy), the speed of the printer (pages per minute or ppm), the price of the printer, and how quickly the printer consumes toner or ink along with the price of toner refills. Also consider which printers work with your computer platform. Not all printers work with Mac computers, for example. The initial investment in a printer typically pales in comparison to the price of toner or ink cartridge refills over time.

Some printers combine printing capabilities with other useful functions. All-in-one, or multi-function, printers combine printing, copying, and faxing functions. Wi-Fi printers connect to your home or work Wi-Fi network so that they are accessible to any device on the network. More recent innovations, such as Google’s Cloud Print, allow printers to connect to the Internet so they can be accessed from any computer with an Internet connection.

Types of Printers
Printer Type Description
Laser printer A laser printer uses techniques similar to those of photocopiers to provide the highest-quality printed output. Color laser printers can be rather expensive, so many home users settle for either a less expensive black and white laser or a color ink-jet printer.
Ink-jet printer An ink-jet printer sprays droplets from ink cartridges onto paper to create pixels. Although ink-jet printers create good-looking hard copy, it is not quite as polished as what laser printers provide. Also, ink may run if it gets wet, so use care when printing addresses onto envelopes and hope they aren’t delivered on a rainy day.
3D Printer
3D Printing

3D printer. Authored by Mirko Tobias Schäfer, License: CC BY 2.0
A 3D printer builds 3D objects by adding one layer of material at a time from the bottom up until the object is completed.

Just as digitization changed the world by allowing us to represent real-world objects digitally, 3D printing is changing the world by allowing us to turn bits into tangible objects. 3D printing is empowering individuals to transform ideas into usable objects, powering the “maker” revolution. In addition to inspiring hobbyists, 3D printing is transforming every industry from healthcare to food and fashion, to engineering and manufacturing by allowing professionals to test ideas and easily manufacture custom products.

Many people have seen or heard about simple 3D printers that print small plastic objects. These printers are available at Walmart, Home Depot, and other retail stores for around $1,000. Using these consumer-grade printers and raw material called filament, individuals can print out small toys and novelty items as well as useful utensils for the home.

What many people don’t realize is that these small consumer 3D printers make up only a small portion of the 3D printing movement. Today, people are printing in just about every available material, including plastic, nylon, wood, clay, concrete, metals, and even glass and carbon fiber using printers ranging in cost from $500 to $500,000.

A more sophisticated and accurate name for 3D printing is additive manufacturing. There are four techniques for additive manufacturing, shown in the table below:

3D Printing (Additive Manufacturing) Techniques
Technique Description
Fused deposition modeling (FDM) A model is produced by extruding small beads of material, which harden quickly to form layers.
Granular materials binding A model is produced by laying out one layer of powder at a time and applying heat or liquid to selective areas of each layer to bind the powder into a solid
Lamination A model is produced by bonding layers of a material—typically sheets of paper—and cutting each layer at specific points.
Stereolithography A solid part is produced from a liquid polymer one layer at a time, solidifying the polymer with UV light.
3D printers print objects from an STL (stereolithography) file (STL stands for stereolithography). There are several ways to acquire STL files. Many printers come with a catalogue of files to print. They are also freely available at thingiverse.com. Another way to acquire STL files is to scan physical items with a 3D scanner. A final way to produce an STL file is to create it from scratch using CAD or 3D design software such as AutoCAD, Maya, Rhino, Blender, or Tinkercad.

3D printing is most useful for rapid prototyping and customization. Rapid prototyping allows engineers and designers to experiment with designs for parts and products quickly and easily. Prior to 3D printing, it was costly and time consuming to have models created from designs. 3D printing is especially useful for creating one-of-a-kind products, something costly and time consuming for traditional mass production systems.

The following table shows how 3D printing is impacting many professions and industries.

3D Printing Professional Uses
Professional Possible Uses
Engineer, architect, interior design 3D printing allows these professionals to test their designs and view them in three dimensions rather than on the computer screen.
Sculptors, potters, and artists 3D printing is being used to create sculpture and ceramics. Artists can create works of art with clay or other materials and then further craft the objects with their hands.
Construction Using massive 3D printers, buildings and building parts can be constructed in any shape and design that can be imagined.
Physicians U Bioprinting is a form of 3D printing that builds organs from stem cells.
Chefs and nutritionists 3D printing makes it possible to create food items from specific ingredients in a variety of shapes to meet an individual’s nutritional needs and tastes. Meat and leather are being printed from cow cells. Chefs are creating candy confections from chocolate and sugar.
Fashion Designers are printing shoes, head wear, jewelry, and even clothing from a variety of materials in unique shapes and forms.
Education Classroom lab objects and manipulatives can be printed for a fraction of the cost that schools typically pay. Museums are also making their collections available to download and print.
