# Web Resources

Web resources are many and varied, assisting individuals, businesses, and organizations with all facets of life, including education, news and information sharing, communication, travel, commerce, employment, and entertainment.

Web Resources

Source: Facebook; Content Courtesy of Ken Baldauf Attribution: Fair Use
Consider the many ways web resources support people in their personal and professional lives. Many web users spend a majority of their online time on Facebook, discovering interesting information about their friends (see figure). While Facebook may be the most popular web resource, there are millions of others in several categories that are useful in many ways. Knowing more about these resources helps us to make the best use of our online time to lead more efficient, effective, and fulfilling lives.

Businesses rely on web resources to function efficiently and effectively. Many businesses exist because of the web. Professionals rely on web resources to develop skills and advance in their careers. Individuals rely on the web for communication, information, and entertainment. Sometimes, web resources are just a fun way to pass or waste some time. You learned in the Apps unit how the web is becoming a platform for all types of computing activities. Increasingly, people depend on web resources to enrich all aspects of life.

Search Engine
A search engine is a valuable software tool that enables users to find information on the web by specifying words that are key to their topics of interest—keywords.

The fundamental purpose of the web is to make it easier to find related content from diverse Internet sources by following hyperlinks. However, the web has become so large that many complain of information overload, or the inability to find the information they need because of the overabundance of information. To relieve the strain of information overload, web developers have provided web search engines to help organize and index web content.

Search Engines

Source: © 2012 Google, Inc. Attribution: Fair Use
Search has become the biggest application on the web. Search giant Google has become one of the world’s most profitable companies, with more than $50 billion in annual revenue. Search has become such a profitable business because it’s the one application that everyone uses. Search engine companies make money through advertisements. Because everyone uses search, advertisers are keen to pay to have their ads posted on search pages.

Google has the largest share of the search engine market with around 73 percent of the global market. Microsoft Bing is second with 9.2 percent, and China’s Baidu search engine is third with roughly 8.7 percent. Google has leveraged its market dominance to expand into many other web-based and mobile product markets. In fact, Google has become so diversified in the products it produces that in 2015 it underwent a major corporate reorganization, creating a holding company named Alphabet Inc., in which Google served as its leading subsidiary.

The divisions in Alphabet are:

Google
Search
Advertising
Maps
Apps
YouTube
Android
Calico (life-extension biotech research)
Nest (smart home appliances)
Fiber (high-speed Internet service)
Ventures and Capital (investing)
X lab (research incubator—self-driving cars, delivery drones, etc.)
Most search engines use an automated approach that scours the web with bots (automated programs) called spiders that follow all web links in an attempt to catalog every webpage by topic. Each webpage is analyzed and ranked using unique algorithms, and the resulting information is stored in a database. Google maintains billions of indexed webpages on dozens of clusters of up to 2,000 computers each. A keyword search in a search engine isn’t a search of the web, but rather a search of a database that stores information about webpages. The database is continuously checked and refreshed so that it is an accurate reflection of the current status of the web.

Microsoft has taken a different direction with its Bing search engine. Bing has an innovative design that Microsoft calls a decision engine. Bing provides more than just a long list of links in its search results. It also provides information on related topics and services. The idea is to provide users with all the information needed to act on whatever task is related to the search. Similarly, Wolfram Alpha is an “answer engine” designed to answer factual queres. For example, you can use Wolfram Alpha to find out the difference between a tortoise and a hare, how many feet are in 120 meters, what the interest is on a 30-year mortgage at 5 percent, and which words end in “alic.”

Google is continually adjusting its search algorithm to provide better links and even direct answers to queries. Google hopes to create a “semantic web” that is able to answer any question by more precisely interpreting the meaning, or semantics, of what the user is seeking. Google Assistant is a step in that direction. Just ask Google Assistant a question and web results pop up, instantly providing useful information. Apple’s Siri, Amazon’s Alexa, and Microsoft’s Cortana are similar apps. Once provided primarily for mobile devices, these personal digital assistants are now embedded in laptop and desktop computers and in home appliances so that those who use them can speak a keyword and question nearly anywhere, any time and get an immediate response.
