# Internet Communications

Internet communications include text-based communications like email and instant messaging, voice communications like Voice over IP (VoIP), video communications, and a variety of group and community forums.

## Internet Communication

"Showing his drawing to her aunt in Singapore" by Carlos Ebert is licensed under CC BY 2.0
The digital revolution has ushered in the age of pervasive computing, where anyone can have access to information anywhere, anytime. Equally important and influential is the growth of pervasive communication, the ability to communicate with anyone, anytime through a variety of formats. Pervasive communication is the result of advances in wireless and Internet communication technologies. These technologies are fundamentally altering the ways in which personal and professional relationships are created and nurtured.

Before the Internet, forms of two-way communication were limited to face-to-face, telephone, or printed word (as in mailing a letter). The Internet has broadened our communications options considerably.

Today, you can phone, email, meet in person, text, update your status, video chat, send a letter, tweet, and otherwise communicate with anyone, any time over multiple communication channels from any location. When determining the most effective and convenient manner in which to communicate, it is useful to consider the importance of what you need to communicate along with the strengths and weaknesses of the various communication channels. There are two basic forms of communication: synchronous and asynchronous. In synchronous communication, people communicate in real time, exchanging thoughts in a fluid conversation. Face-to-face conversations, video chat, telephone conversations, online chat, and instant messaging are examples of synchronous communication.

Asynchronous communication allows participants to leave messages for each other to be read, heard, or watched and then responded to at the recipient’s convenience. Answering machines, voicemail, social network posts, text messages, tweets, and email are examples of asynchronous communication.

Each form of communication should be evaluated in terms of quality, convenience, and time/delay. Typically, the quality and speed of communications compare inversely with the level of convenience. Internet and wireless communication can be categorized as text, voice, or video. With increasing amounts of voice communication traveling over the Internet and Internet communication expanding to mobile phones, there is little need to differentiate between Internet communication and mobile phone communication when it comes to evaluating current forms of digital communication.

With all these forms of communication, it would seem that miscommunication or lack of communication would be a thing of the past. Unfortunately, people still miscommunicate and choose ineffective modes of communication. When planning communication, consider the importance of what is being communicated along with the type of person you are communicating with. When communicating with figures of authority, avoid casual language, emojis (pictures from punctuation, like smileys), texting, slang, and other casual modes of communication. Using less convenient but more effective modes of communication can go a long way in making convincing arguments and showing those you communicate with that you are serious. Remember that no form of remote communication is as powerful or meaningful as in-person, face-to-face communication.

The following table lists current forms of communication in order of convenience and effectiveness. The first listing is the most convenient but least effective, and the last is the least convenient but the most effective in getting a message across. As you read down the table, consider which elements of communication are included and missing from each form. Include subtle components of communication such as eye contact, facial expression, voice inflection, body language, and personal space.

Forms of Electronic Communication
Text Communication
Text Messaging (Asynchronous) Communication through short text messages via cell phone or social network.
Email (Asynchronous) Communication of text-based messages through transmission over a computer network. Email is only slightly more effective than text messaging because there is no character limit. Email supports file attachments, which makes it a useful method for transferring data.
Messaging via social media (Synchronous) Communication through synchronous text messaging between two or more participants utilizing social media such as Facebook, Google+, or Twitter. Also useful for sharing photos, videos, and links.
Voice Communication
Voicemail (Asynchronous) Communication by means of voice messages left on phone services or Internet services..
Phone (Synchronous) Communication through phone conversations allows the use of voice inflection for more effective communication than text-based communications.
Communication through phone convInternet voice (Synchronous) Communication through Internet-based voice through services such as Skype (a free online communication tool that supports text, voice, and video) or online chat services that support voice communications.
Virtual Chat
Virtual chat (Synchronous) Communication in an online virtual world where users are represented as avatars (animated characters) and chat via voice or text while interacting with others.
Video Communication
Video phone and chat (Synchronous) Communication through synchronous video, typically over the Internet or private data network.
Telepresence (Synchronous) Communication through high-quality video and audio connections over the Internet, along with large, high-definition displays to support meetings between people around the world as if they were gathered at one location.
Social Media
Social media, sometimes referred to as social networks, refers to websites that allow people to share information, ideas, photos, and other forms of media in virtual communities and to comment on items shared.

The web was originally designed for information to flow in one direction, from those with the resources to publish information on the web to the public. As web technologies evolved, the web transformed into a bidirectional information source, where those consuming content were able to easily contribute content. Once two-way communication was enabled, it was only natural that online communities would follow and websites to support those communities would emerge. Collectively, these websites are called social media. Billions of people have invested significant portions of their lives in building their online social networks and reputations.

Social Media

Source: Courtesy of Pinterest Attribution: Fair Use
Social media provides a convenient method for connecting and building relationships with friends and like-minded individuals online. Depending on the service, you might “friend” other users to build a community of friends, or you might “follow” other users if you are interested in reading what they post. Most social media, such as Facebook, LinkedIn, and Google+, requires an account which is associated with a user profile in the community. Social media websites typically have a unique focus to differentiate themselves in the market. The table below shows some of the most popular social medi

Social Media Platforms
Social Media Platform Monthly Active Users Description
Facebook 1.71 billion A general social media platform that allows members to post text, photos, or video to the news feed, which can be shared with friends, subsets of friends, individuals, or the world. Facebook supports multiple communication channels between members as well as 3rd-party apps and many other features.
Google+ 300 million Facebook’s only halfway serious competitor Google+ was a Google-offered alternative that offered many of the same features as Facebook plus video chat with Google Hangouts and integration with Google’s other software. Google discontinued Google+ support in 2019.
Instagram 500 million A photo-centric social media site that allows members to edit and upload photos and video from mobile devices, using a mobile app, and share them on a variety of social networking platforms.
Twitter 300 million A streamlined social media platform that allows members to send and read short 140-character messages called “tweets.” Members “follow” their favorite tweeters to see what they may say next and to perhaps retweet a tweet. Hashtags, such as #MTVStars, are used in tweets to make it easy to follow or search for specific topics.
Snapchat 150 million A mobile photo/video messaging app that enables private messaging and public content. Snapchat provides more privacy than other messaging apps by implementing a self-destruct mechanism for messages.
LinkedIn 106 million A professional social network platform that allows members to create a professional profile that serves as an online resume. Members create professional “connections” with other members to create professional opportunities or to find a job.
Pinterest 150 million Another photo-centric social media platform, but this one allows members to collect images from the web to store in themed collections called boards. For example, a member might create a “Beach Destination” board to collect photos of possible vacation options for future reference or to share with friends.
