# Online Information

Online information refers to information of all kinds—business, personal, governmental, factual, opinionated, and even inaccurate—that is delivered over the Internet and web.

The web has become a very popular resource for sharing information. In some cultures, it is the primary resource for information, beating out newspapers, books, television, and radio. Material once stored in volumes on library shelves is now available in digital form on library websites.

Finding information online and being able to distinguish useful and reliable information from opinionated and inaccurate information has become a valuable skill for those wishing to stay informed. Finding information on the web can be a challenge. Search engines are a valuable tool in this regard. Choosing search terms to get the desired results is a skill that grows with practice.

Unlike information published through traditional media such as newspapers, magazines, and books, much of what is published on the web has no quality control, editors, or peer review. When judging information provided on the web, always consider the source. Anonymous postings and publications should not be trusted until you identify the provider of the information. If that person or organization is unfamiliar to you, search the web for information on the provider. Providers of valid and trustworthy information on the web typically go out of their way to include references to well-known and highly regarded authorities.

## Online Information

Source: Courtesy of Wikimedia Attribution: Fair Use
Wikipedia utilizes a crowdsourced model to collect, publish, and review information in an effort to create a universal online encyclopedia. Crowdsourcing refers to development models that source the work to the Internet population. While crowdsourcing has proven successful, it has been criticized for having a bias toward white male views. Wikipedia encourages all contributors to include links that support research on any topic. Although it may not be appropriate to cite a Wikipedia article as a source for research, often you can find an acceptable source in the links provided in the Wikipedia article. Encyclopedia Britannica, which is now available online, on your mobile phone, and on your tablet, is an authoritative resource for all kinds of information.

Wikipedia - Online Information

Source: © 2012 Encyclopedia Britannica Inc, All Rights Reserved Attribution: Fair Use
The following table shows the various types of information found on the web:

Types of Web Information
Types of Information Description
Traditionally Published Works Many publishers and libraries are creating digital forms of past and current published works. Digital libraries offer access, often free, to a wealth of books, research resources, and periodicals. Huge databases of published articles, like the one provided by LexisNexis, are available; unfortunately, many of these require a membership fee.
News Most newspaper, magazine, radio, and television news sources now have an online presence, delivering articles through webpages, blogs, podcasts, and streaming video.
Business Most businesses have an online presence, delivering information on their products and services and providing a method to purchase their wares.
Financial Banks and other financial institutions provide information for individuals, investors, and those interested in the economy.
Government, political, and legal All levels of governments are represented on the web, along with political and legal information from all perspectives.
Opinion Blogs and social networks provide a platform for anyone on the web to share opinions, solicit feedback, and create discussions on any topic.
Personal Social media has created a space for anyone to post information on their personal interests and characteristics.
Support The web is increasingly the first place people turn when they need help with life issues. Information on the web can help you find the perfect mate, prepare for your wedding, get a job, buy a house, and prepare for your first child. All of life’s major challenges are addressed on the web.
Online News
Online news refers to newspapers, magazines, journals, news radio and television, and blogs that deliver news and information about current events on the web.

The web is a powerful tool for keeping informed about local, state, national, and global news. It allows the public to actively research issues and become more knowledgeable about current events. Traditional news media deliver the news through television, radio, and newspapers. These media provide only the news that they consider of interest to the general public. Items of special or unique interest may be bumped and replaced with more general stories. In contrast, the web has an abundance of special-interest coverage. It also provides the capacity to drill down deeper into the subject matter.

All major newspaper, radio, and television news services have expanded to provide online news coverage. This trend has put the various forms of media in direct competition with each other as their online format expands to include text, photos, audio, and video. Bringing the news to the web is eliminating the lines of distinction between traditional newspaper, radio, and television news sources.

Online News

Source: Reuters Attribution: Fair Use
The leading news agencies have a strong online presence as well. Reuters, the Associated Press, the BBC, and others are sources of global news and information for media companies and the general population. While traditional news sources migrate to the web, new sources of news are emerging from online companies. News websites from Google, Yahoo!, Digg, and Newsvine provide the most popular or interesting news stories from a variety of news sources.

In a trend some refer to as social journalism or citizen journalism, ordinary citizens are more involved in reporting the news than ever before.

Through online tools such as blogs, podcasts, videocasts (vcasts), discussion groups, and social media, the online community is taking journalism into its own hands and reporting the news from each individual’s perspective. Although social journalism provides us with important news we would otherwise not get, its sources may not be as reliable as mainstream media sources. As we hear the news from nonprofessional journalists, reporting without experience, training, or the strict guidelines of formal news agencies, it is important to remember that the information may be biased, misrepresented, mistaken, or perhaps even deliberately misleading.

The 2016 presidential election brought attention to the large amount of fake news stories being distributed on social media and the web. Fake news may be generated by individuals jumping to conclusions, such as when a 35-year-old Texan noticed a fleet of tour buses at a Trump rally and tweeted about paid protesters being bused to demonstrations against President-elect Donald J. Trump. The tweet went viral, fueling a nationwide conspiracy theory, but the claim turned out to be untrue.

Fake news can also generate money for those who post it. The money is generated by ads on the pages containing the fake news. Many people around the world have made fake news their profession, preying on human gullibility and political tensions to earn upwards of $5,000 to $10,000 a month from ad clicks on their outrageously false news pages. The proliferation of fake news online, and the possibility of bias in news from all sources, requires us to approach what we read online cautiously. Check multiple reliable sources to confirm that the news you read is accurate and true, especially for news stories that seem too outrageous to be true.

Financial Services
Online financial services support money management, loans, investments, and transactions for individuals, businesses, and organizations. Online services empower Internet users to get a better grip on their finances. Whether you are interested in opening a bank account, starting a business, balancing your budget, transferring funds, paying bills, borrowing money, lending or investing money, making purchases, paying your taxes, or any number of money-related activities, you’ll find the most convenient way of getting it done is online. In fact, in a growing number of cases, the only way to get it done is online.

Online Finanical Services

Source: TaxAct Attribution: Fair Use
Online banking has become the default method of banking for both individuals and organizations. In fact, banks are closing their physical locations as the demand for them shrinks. Through a bank’s website, a customer can check account balances, transfer money between accounts, make payments on loans, credit cards, and other bills, and schedule automatic monthly deposits and payments.

Many lenders, government agencies, city utilities, and other service providers expect customers to pay their bills online. Some even charge extra for customers who insist on paying by check through the mail or using cash in person. Processing payments online is much less expensive for a business than processing them through the mail or in person. Payments may be made through a bank account or through the payee’s website. Since routine monthly payments typically charge penalties for late payments, it is wise to set up automatic payments so that none are overlooked.

Online services exist for all types of financial activities. Mint.com and quickbooksonline.com are online personal finance services that track your spending and income to advise you on a practical monthly budget. TaxAct.com helps millions of U.S. taxpayers file their federal and state taxes each year by offering several different options for varying expenses for filing your taxes. The software that a company like TaxAct provides for filing taxes has drastically changed the way that people file their taxes; instead of filing through an accountant, they can now do it themselves online. Zillow.com helps home seekers discover homes and mortgages that are affordable based on their savings and monthly income. Lendingtree.com and hundreds of other sites assist people with borrowing and refinancing.

Crowdfunding has become a popular way to finance a new business. Websites like Kickstarter and Indiegogo allow entrepreneurs to make a business pitch for a new service or product in order to get Internet users to invest. The investors are promised a reduced rate on the product when it is ready for market. Unfortunately, not all ventures make it that far. GoFundMe is another crowdfunding site that provides a platform for raising money for all kinds of personal needs, including medical operations and social needs. Kiva applies crowdfunding to support entrepreneurs and small business owners in developing countries.

The Motley Fool, investmentadvice.org, and others are available to assist people for wise financial investments and retirement planning. E\*Trade, Scottrade, Charles Schwab, and others provide tools to make investments online.

PayPal provides tools for emailing money to others and paying for services and goods online without a credit card. PayPal Here is a PayPal service that allows in-person transactions to be “rung up” on a mobile phone or tablet. Square provides a similar service and provides a credit card reader that attaches to mobile phones and tablets to allow anyone to conduct credit card transactions with a card swipe. The world of ecommerce, where business transactions are carried out by the billions everyday across the Internet, is addressed in a separate unit.

Online Education
Online education refers to websites designed to educate or support education and training.

As a tool for sharing information and a primary repository of information on all subjects, the web is ideally suited for education and training.

Advances in interactive web technologies further support important educational relationships between teacher and student and among students. The web plays a major role in all levels of education.

Emerge with Computers—this software you are using—is the ideal example of the power of online education! In today’s highly competitive and rapidly changing professional environments, more professionals are turning to the web to learn skills that will enhance their professional value.

Educational institutions of all types and sizes are seizing the web as a tool to enhance classroom education or extend it to individuals who cannot physically attend.

Primary schools use the web to inform parents of their students’ progress and grades as well as school schedules and activities. Teachers utilize online drills and exercises to reinforce classroom lessons. By high school, students have integrated the web into daily study habits.

Most college-level courses rely on the web to enhance learning. Educational support products, such as Moodle, Blackboard, Canvas, and Desire2Learn, provide an integrated web environment that includes virtual chat for class members; a discussion group for posting questions and comments; access to the class syllabus and agenda, student grades, and class announcements; and links to class-related material. Some course websites deliver filmed lectures using webcasting technologies provided by companies like Tegrity.

Such environments can complement the traditional classroom experience or replace it altogether.

Online Education

Source: Coursera Attribution: Fair Use
Conducting classes over the web with no physical class meetings is called distance education or distance learning. Many high schools and colleges offer distance learning classes, which provide a convenient method for nontraditional students to attend college. Nontraditional students include students who have job or family obligations that might otherwise prohibit them from attending college. Distance learning offers them a way of working through class material on a flexible schedule. Some schools offer entire degree programs through distance learning.

Beyond traditional education, corporations such as Skillsoft offer professional job-skills training over the web. Job seekers often use these services to acquire specialized business or technical training. Some of the training leads to certification. Certification verifies a person’s skill and understanding in a particular area. It has become very important, especially for some technical skill sets, to assure an employer that a job applicant truly has the skills claimed.

Online Education Platforms

Source: LinkedIn Attribution: Fair Use
Museums, libraries, private businesses, government agencies, and many other typ)es of organizations and individuals offer educational materials online for free or for a fee. Consider eHow, the website that claims to teach you “how to do just about everything!” Certiport offers training and testing for technology certification, such as for Microsoft and Adobe products.

Review and Practice
Below you will find a quiz to review the recently covered material, there are 2 questions. Quizzes will be graded.
