# Generics

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/304903851.hd.mp4?s=c9124ce70f8488821fb914db3c4714855eb9ef79&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The most common use of an `interface` in other strongly typed languages like C# and Java is to enforce that a `class` meets a particular structure. You will be learning more about TypeScript `classes` in the next lesson, but below is an introduction to how **classes** work with `interfaces`.

**Tip!**
TypeScript classes are very similar to JavaScript classes, but because interfaces exist in TypeScript and not JavaScript, TypeScript classes can work with interfaces, as you will see in the below examples.

## Classes

In TypeScript, when using an `interface` with a `class`, you use the **implements** keyword to `implement` the `interface` into the `class`, as shown below.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
interface Lifespan {
  currentTime: Date;
}

class AppointmentDateFormatter implements Lifespan {
  currentTime: Date;

  // notice this constructor does not have return type annotation
  constructor(day: number, month: number, year: number) {
    this.currentTime = new Date(year, month, day);
  }
}
```

- As you can see, you need to **redefine** the `property` and `type` _within_ the class, this is because `implementing` an interface into a `class` is different from `inheriting`.
- - Just because you have the keywords `implements Lifespan` does not mean that the `property` and `types` within the `interface` will be inherited into the `class`. Remember, the interface is just a blueprint!
- Date is a built-in JavaScript object that will take in a date a turn it into a specific format (ex. January 1, 1970, 00:00:00 UTC). These _must_ be instantiated by defining the parts of the date.

## Using Methods with Interfaces and Classes

You are also able to define methods within `interfaces` which can then be `implemented` by a class.

Below, the `interface` and `class` have been updated to include a `method` that prints the date in a clean format.
**index.ts** file:

```ts
interface Lifespan {
  currentTime: Date;
  printDate(): void;
}

class AppointmentDateFormatter implements Lifespan {
  currentTime: Date;

  constructor(day: number, month: number, year: number) {
    this.currentTime = new Date(year, month, day);
  }

  printDate(): void {
    console.log(this.currentTime.toDateString());
  }
}

const dateOfAppointment = new AppointmentDateFormatter(12, 4, 2018);

dateOfAppointment.printDate();
```

Once run, the output will look like below:

```terminal
Sat May 18 2021
```

[Next](./12.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./11.md)
