# Types Examples

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/305134123.hd.mp4?s=ecea59f6c446e2a7eb4d89ebdb98b51744fec595&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Instantiation

Now that you have learned how to create a `class`, how do you use them? The answer is to **instantiate** the `class`. To do this, you need to use the new keyword to create a "new" class object. To use these `classes`, `instantiate` them with the new keyword followed by the name of the `class`.

`Instantiation` is the process of instantiating an object of a class. The object is also referred to as an `instance` of the class.

## Instantiation Example

Consider the following example:

```ts
class Rectangle {
  height: number;
  width: number;
  constructor(height: number, width: number) {
    this.height = height;
    this.width = width;
  }

  perimeter() {
    return this.height * 2 + this.width * 2;
  }
}

const myYard = new Rectangle(24, 32);
console.log(myYard.perimeter());
```

- Above, you are declaring a new class named `Rectangle`. It has `height` and `width` properties, a `constructor`, and a method, `perimeter()`.

- Next, you have a constant named `myYard` that is an instantiation of the class `Rectangle` by way of the `new` keyword. This is the point where you provide the values for the parameters of the class constructor.

- Lastly, there is a `console.log` with the `myYard` variable calling the `perimeter()` method.

  - Since `myYard` is a new `instance` of the `Rectangle` class, it can access the `perimeter()` method defined within.

**Try It!**
Add the code above into your AngularL02 `index.ts` file and run your project by typing `npm start` into the integrated terminal.

After running the code above, you will see the following output in the console:

instantiateFigure 2-1: Instantiate

If you just console.log myYard without calling the perimeter() method, you will get the following output:

instantiateFigure 2-2: Instantiate

## Review Quiz

Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material.

1.  Classes can be defined using

    A. A class declaration

    B. A named class expression

    C. An unnamed class expression

    D. All of the Above

2.  Which of the following class definitions is not valid?

    A. `class Dog{}`

    B. `const Dog = class {}`

    C. `const Dog = class Animal{}`

    D. `All are valid`

3.  A constructor is generally used to initialize properties of an instance of a class.

    A. True

    B. False

4.  A class can have multiple constructors.

    A. True

    B. False

5.  Classes can be defined after creating an instance of them.

    A. True

    B. False

[Next](./7.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./6.md)
