# Overview

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/266951309.hd.mp4?s=e93e2963481de56f8cdc69f76705656006a1b755&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

AJAX stands for Asynchronous JavaScript and XML. This technology helps to load data from the server without refreshing the browser page. Ajax uses XHTML for content, CSS for presentation, along with the DOM and JavaScript for dynamic content display. Conventional web applications transmit information to and from the server using simultaneous requests. It means that once you fill out a form and have hit the submit button, you will be directed to a new page with new information that has come from the server.

With AJAX, when you hit submit, JavaScript will make a request to the server, decipher the results, and then update the current screen. This process allows the user to continue using the application while the client program requests information from the server in the background.

## Technologies AJAX Depends On

AJAX cannot work alone. It is used in combination with other technologies to create interactive web pages.

JavaScript
A loosely typed scripting language
JavaScript function is called when an event occurs in a page
Holds the AJAX operation together
DOM
API for accessing and manipulating structured documents
Represents the structure of XML and HTML documents
CSS
Allows for a clear separation of the presentation style from the content and may be changed programmatically by JavaScript
XMLHttpRequest
JavaScript object that performs asynchronous interaction with the server

## Examples of AJAX

A few examples of AJAX being used by different websites:

Google Maps

The user can drag the map around using the mouse, instead of clicking on a button
Google Suggest

When typing in the Google search bar, Google offers suggestions based on what you are typing. You can use the arrow keys to navigate the suggestions
Browser Support
You may think that every browser would support the use of AJAX, but that is incorrect. When a browser does not support AJAX, it merely means that the browser does not support the creation of a JavaScript object XMLHttpRequest object.

The following major browsers support the use of AJAX:

Google Chrome 1.0 and above
Apple Safari 1.2 and above
Microsoft Internet Explorer 7 and above
Microsoft Edge
Mozilla Firefox 1.0 and above
Opera
You can find an up-to-date list here.

## Review

Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Next](./2.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)
