# DOM innerHTML Property

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293872417.hd.mp4?s=74234fba9e0d72003645f5b08df1888298e8ffb1&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

.innerHTML is a DOM property that can be used in two different ways. The first way is to retrieve HTML text that currently exists on the page. The second is to change the text inside of the element using JavaScript. Let's explore both ways.

innerHTML Retrieving Text
Say you need the value of a paragraph tag because you need to work with that text in JavaScript. To be able to retrieve that text, you have to use .innerHTML. You may be tempted to think using .value will retrieve the HTML, but it won't. .value is designed to pull in the values of input fields, not the data of preexisting HTML.

Consider below:

```html
<p id="paragraph">I am a paragraph</p>
```

```js
var text = document.getElementById("paragraph").innerHTML;
```

Above, there is a paragraph with an id of paragraph and then setting the value of that paragraph to a variable text using the DOM .innerHTML property.

Now, if you wanted to work with the above paragraph, you could expand and use .innerHTML to post more HTML onto your page.

```html
<p id="paragraph">I am a paragraph</p>
```

```js
var text = document.getElementById("paragraph").innerHTML;

document.getElementById("paragraph").innerHTML = text + " and I am awesome!";
```

When you pull in the element by its id, use .innerHTML and then set it to what you want to add, as it will post whatever has been set to the element that has that specific id with the added text, as shown in the example above. The output of the above code will be:

I am a paragraph and I am awesome!

To wrap up what has been done so far: First, pull the info of the paragraph element with an id of paragraph and set it to a variable of text. Next, the second time you use the DOM, you are setting the element of paragraph to the variable text plus the string and I am awesome!. It will then replace the paragraph tag with the new string "I am a paragraph and I am awesome!".

Take a look at one more example:

```html
<p id="emptyParagraph"></p>
```

```js
document.getElementById("emptyParagraph").innerHTML = "I am an empty paragraph";
```

Above, you have created an empty paragraph tag with a class of emptyParagraph. Then set that paragraph to have an .innerHTML of "I am an empty paragraph". This way is very useful when you want to post some data and you want the area you are posting to empty until the posting happens.

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Next](./12.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./11.md)
