Styling
Styling Text
In the last lesson, you learned how to change the color and size of the text. However, that is not all you can do to the text. You can also style the text so you can change the font displayed on the site.

To change the font, you can use the font-family property. You can use the font-family property by using either a font family name or a generic family name. It is time to explore the differences between these two types of font families.

Generic Family Name
When defining fonts in your CSS, you can use fonts that are generic. Generic fonts determine how the font appears. So if you want a cursive font, you can input 'cursive' and it will give you cursive. See below for the differences in the generic fonts:

serif

sans-serif

monospace

cursive

fantasy

system-ui

If you wanted to set the font-family of all <p> tags using one of the above generic fonts, you would do it like so:

p {
font-family: sans-serif;
}
I am a paragraph with a generic font of sans-serif!

Font Family Name
The Font Family name uses fonts that are already predefined and able to be read by most web browsers. It is important to know that some fonts, not all, are considered web safe. This means they are available on most operating systems and will always display in the browser. These fonts are:

Arial

Courier New

Verdana

Georgia

Times New Roman

Trebuchet MS

If you wanted to set the font-family of all <p> tags using one of the above fonts, you would do it like so:

p {
font-family: Courier New;
}
I am a paragraph with a font of Courier New!

If a browser does not support a specific font, typically a fallback system is used. This system is where you would list multiple fonts for the browser to read, just in case one or more are not readable. For example, some computers have an older version of Courier New called Courier and an old version of Times New Roman called Times. It is advisable to list the older version as well as the new to make sure these computers are covered too.

Setting the font family with the fallback system is done like so:

p {
font-family: 'Trebuchet MS', Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}
The browser will attempt to use the first font it finds going from left to right.

Tip!
Helvetica is a Mac based font. By adding it to the list with Arial, it gives good coverage of the font desired as Arial and Helvetica are very similar.

Additional Info!
To learn more about font-family, please visit: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-family.

Previous
