# CSS Border

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293065565.hd.mp4?s=a840f4c94d4ed8c2de13b0c7e87fdcd9f5d260ac&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

You can create and use a border around any of the elements in HTML. A border does not have to be a dull, boring line. It can be exciting and fun with the different border properties available to you in CSS. It is time to explore what can be done!

CSS Border Properties
The CSS border properties allow you to define the border area of a box. The border can either be a predefined style like solid line, double line, dotted line, etc. or it can be an image. The following section describes how to set the various properties defining the style, color, and width of the border.

Border-Style
The border-style property sets what kind of border you want and may take one of the following values:

none - Defines having no border
hidden - Defines a hidden border
solid - Defines a solid border
dashed - Defines a border with dashed lines
dotted - Defines a border that is dotted
double - Defines having a double border
groove - Defines a 3D grooved border
inset - Defines a 3D inset border
outset - Defines a 3D outset border
ridge - Defines a 3D ridged border
Below is what each of these properties will look like:

No border

A hidden border

A solid border

A dashed border

A dotted border

A double border

A groove border

An inset border

An outset border

A ridge border

Tip!
The border-style properties that are 3D all depend on what the border-color property is, which will make them stand out even more. You will explore that property later on.

This is how it will look in your CSS page if you are targeting the <p> tag and you want a dashed border:

p {
border-style: dashed;
}
When using the border-style property, you can have one to four values. In the above example, there was just one value being used which will define all sides of the border to be the same. If you were using four values, the value listed from left to right would define the top, right, bottom and left sides of the border, in that order.

border diagram ImageFigure 5-1: Border

The result of the above diagram will be:

A mixed border

[Next](./6.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./4.md)
