# Displaying Content (Continued)

Positioning Content & Altering Document Flow
Within CSS, it is possible to change default positioning behavior with the position property. This change allows the browser to account for various screen sizes like monitors, tablets, and phones.

The normal behavior of elements is to follow a set flow: the order you place elements in your code is the order they are displayed. However, this behavior can be changed by setting the value for position to static, relative, absolute, or fixed. Some of these values rely on defining the top, right, bottom, and left properties. These properties define where on the page the element will live. Below is a list of the position values and whether they rely on the top, right, bottom, and left properties.

static - This value doesn't position the content in any unique way. It is positioned in comparison to the normal flow of the page. The top, right, bottom, and left properties will not affect this value.
relative - This value positions the element according to the normal flow of the document but then offsets. It's relative to itself based on the values of top, right, bottom, and left properties.
fixed - This value removes the element from the normal flow of the document. It is positioned relative to the screen's viewport and doesn't move when scrolled. Its final position is determined by the values of top, right, bottom, and left.
absolute - This value removes the element from the normal flow of the document. This allows the positioning of the elements based on the browser window vs. other elements. Its final position is determined by the values of top, right, bottom, and left.

```html
<nav>
  <ul>
    <li><a href="home.html">Home</a></li>
    <li><a href="contact.html">Contact</a></li>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

```css
nav {
  position: absolute;
  top: 0px;
}
```

This example will fix the nav to the top of the page, no matter where the user is on the page.

Tip!
The difference between fixed and absolute is fixed takes its calculations from the viewport, and absolute takes its calculations from the nearest parent that is also positioned. If none are found it will work all the way up to the <html> tag.

Additional Info!
If you would like to learn more about positioning content, please visit: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.
