# HTML Events

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/294062784.hd.mp4?s=6bdbbaa89d0faa212f515dff0f4e9eb117196943&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

HTML Events are things that can happen to the HTML elements you have already created. Examples could be the page loading, a button being clicked, or a user inputting some data. When the events happen, you may want to do something with those events. That is when event handlers come into play.

## Event Object

An object that contains information about an event is created when an event is triggered. These objects are called Event Objects. You can listen for events using an event handler. The event handler specifies which event the JavaScript is listening for and defines what function to perform when the event is triggered. This function will receive the Event Object as a parameter. When HTML Elements trigger an event, the Event Object will have default behavior. For example, when a link on the page is clicked, it will automatically reroute the user. Using the Event Object you can change what these default behaviors are with methods like preventDefault(), stopPropagation(), and stopImmediatePropagation().

Additional Info!
For more in-depth information about the Event Object, as well as some examples, read the documentation at: MDN Event.

Handling Events
To handle an event, you can create an event listener. This will listen for the specified action and then perform the function that you provide as the second parameter.

Consider below:

myButton.addEventListener("click", function(event) {
console.log(event.target.innerHTML);
});
With this event listener, anytime this button is clicked, it will send the innerHTML of the button to the console window.

Additional Info!
You can dive more into events and the various events you can incorporate, you can look at W3Schools, MDN for DOM, as well as MDN for Events.

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Quiz Answers](./13-ans.md)

[Next](./14.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./12.md)
