# Scope

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293842265.hd.mp4?s=38477cab6eaabd24d286fe13be2e15876b80d19d&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The Scope is how and where you can access different variables or functions within the code. Imagine your code existing in layers and those layers are defined by the curly braces used in functions, loops, objects, etc. So for example, in earlier lessons you learned to put for loops and if statements inside the curly braces of a function. Those loops and if statements were inside the function scope. A lower level scope has access to the variables and functions of a higher level scope, but a higher level scope will only have access to variables declared in lower level scopes that are declared using the var keyword. Even then there are some rules that limit this access such as if the variable is declared as the first operation of a for loop.

Note: You will learn in upcoming courses how to define variables using different keywords other than 'var' and how they affect their visibility to higher level scopes.

In JavaScript, there are several scopes. However, the two primary scopes are:

Global
Local
It is essential to understand the different types of scope. People can get stuck when writing JavaScript if they are misusing or misunderstanding scope and how it works. To prevent any confusion, it is time to explore how each type of scope is used.

Global Scope
As you have learned in this lesson, and previous lessons, you can create variables inside or outside of a function. When you create a variable that lives by itself and NOT in a function, that variable will live in the Global Scope. Not declaring a variable within a function makes it accessible anywhere on that page.

Consider the following code:

var myAge = 26;

function ageInTwentyYears() {
return myAge + 20; //returns 46
}

function ageTenYearsAgo() {
return myAge - 10; // returns 16
}
Above, you have declared that myAge is 26. You are then reusing that same variable in two different functions and performing a task on that variable. You would not be able to perform the same task if that variable was declared within one of the functions.

Local Scope
When declaring a variable within a function, it will only be accessible within that particular function.

Consider below:

function ageInTwentyYears(){
var myAge = 26;

    return myAge + 20;   //returns 46

}

function ageTenYearsAgo() {
return myAge - 10; // you will get an error
}
Above, the first function will work perfectly because you have declared and set the variable myAge to 26, and then performed a task with that variable. The second function, on the other hand, will not work because it will not know what myAge is. It is trying to use a variable that is not accessible outside of the first function.

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Next](./7.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./6.md)
