# Retrieving DOM Elements

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293242585.hd.mp4?s=d7cfbd58fb1011278e85221fddcc057373603f21&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

There are three main ways to access HTML elements using the DOM:

- document.getElementById();
- document.getElementsByTagName();
- document.getElementsByClassName();

**Caution!**
Look very closely at the differences of these methods. The word Element is plural in the second two DOM methods above.

Now, you will explore how to use each of these methods.

document.getElementById();
This method is the most commonly used DOM method. It will pull in the information of an HTML element with a certain id. Consider the following code:

<!-- Below is a "button" element with an "id" attribute.  -->

<button id="submitButton">Submit!</button>
// Below the variable "myButton" is accessing the button element above by its "id"
var myButton = document.getElementById("submitButton");
The above example is accessing the button element in the DOM by the id ("submitButton"). It is then set to a variable myButton. With this, you can now manipulate the button element within the DOM, such as removing or repositioning it by working with the variable myButton.

The reason this method is used more often is that it is set up to target and retrieve the information of an element with a specific id.

## document.getElementsByTagName();

This method essentially works the same way as document.getElementById();, but by using a tag name and not an id.

```html
<!-- Below are three list items  -->
<li>apples</li>
<li>oranges</li>
<li>bananas</li>
```

```js
// Below the variable fruit is accessing all tags of "li"
var fruit = document.getElementsByTagName("li");
```

This method will return a collection of all li items, which in this case are three different fruits.

## document.getElementsByClassName();

Again, this works the same way as document.getElementById();, but by using the class names instead of the id.

```html
<p class="paragraph">I am a paragraph</p>
```

```js
var text = document.getElementsByClassName("paragraph");
```

This will get all elements with a class name of paragraph and set it to a variable named text.

Review
Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Quiz Answers](./9-ans.md)

[Next](./10.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./8.md)
