# Lesson 2 Practice Hands-On

## Directions

For your Lesson 2 Practice Hands-On, you will be working with your knowledge on TypeScript classes and generics. This Hands-On will not be graded, but we encourage you to complete it. The best way to become a great programmer is to practice! Once you have submitted your project, you will be able to access the solution on the next page. Follow the below steps for setup.

## Setup

1. Open up your terminal/command prompt.

2. Navigate to your desktop in your terminal:

```shell
cd Desktop
```

3. Next, navigate to the `FullStackWeb` directory in your terminal:

```shell
cd FullStackWeb
```

4. Then, navigate to the `FEFAngular` directory in your terminal:

```shell
cd FEFAngular
```

5. Create a new project folder named `L02HandsOn` located within the `FEFAngular` folder in your terminal:

```
mkdir L02HandsOn
```

6. Once the process is complete, navigate into the `L02HandsOn` directory:

```shell
cd L02HandsOn
```

7. Run the following to open your new project in VS Code (or you can open the folder within VS Code directly):

```shell
code .
```

8. Create a file named `package.json` and add the following code:

```json
{
  "name": "lesson-two-handson",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "lesson 2 hands on for the Angular course",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "tsc && node index.js"
  }
}
```

9. Create a file named `index.ts`

10. Within your command prompt/terminal (make sure you are within the L01HandsOn directory), run the following to create a tsconfig.json file:

```shell
tsc --init
```

11. Run `npm start` to create the index.js file.

## Requirements

This project is broken into two parts. Please complete each part.

### Part 1

1.  To begin, add the following code into your `index.ts` file:

```ts
interface Person {
  firstName: string;
  lastName: string;
  birthday: Date;
}
```

2. Create a new class named `Entry`.

- This class should implement the `Person` interface above.

3. Add the following values into the `Entry` class:

- a `firstName` value.
- a `lastName` value.
- a valid date for `birthday`.

4. Create a new instance of the `Entry` class with the name of `newPerson`. This new instance should include the following values as the correct types:

- `Albert`, `Einstein`, `5/14/1879`
  Hint! You will need to use `new Date()`

5. Console.log the values of `newPerson` so the output looks like the following:

```text
First Name: Albert, Last Name: Einstein, Birthday: Wed May 14 1879 00:00:00 GMT-0700 (MST)
```

### Part 2

1. Create an array named `numbers` including the following elements:

- 'twelve'
- 'one-hundred'
- 'sixteen'
- 'forty-four'
- 'seventy-three'
- 'three-million'

2. Create a generic function named `sortArray` with the type of `<S>`.

- This function should take in an array and sort the elements in alphabetical order.
  Hint! You will need to use `.sort()` function

3. Add two `console.log`s

- One should console.log the array before it is sorted
- One should console.log the array after it has been sorted
  Hint! You will need to call the `sortArray` generic function

4. The output should be similar to the following:

```text
Array before sorting: twelve,one-hundred,sixteen,forty-four,seventy-three,three-million
Array after sorting: forty-four,one-hundred,seventy-three,sixteen,three-million,twelve
```
