# Classes

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/305134462.hd.mp4?s=875a0514878e08b211fdaa10827a8b1747421a7e&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In Lesson 1, you were introduced to TypeScript `classes` implementing `interfaces`, but there was not a lot of explanation about classes themselves. During this lesson, you will learn the specifics about classes and how to use them in TypeScript.

Before ES6, `classes` in JavaScript, essentially did not existent. `Functions` and `prototypes` were often used in their place, but there was no official approach to classes and prototype-based `OOP` (Object Oriented Programming). Since ES6 was non-existent, TypeScript was created to include `classes`, as well as several other features that the creators of TypeScript felt should be a part of JavaScript.

These same features were added to JavaScript, with the creation of ES6. They were included with the help of transpilers like Babel. Now these standard features, often seen in other languages, are commonly used inside the JavaScript realm to provide a standard object-oriented approach to the language. JavaScript and TypeScript developers can build applications using an `object-oriented`, `class`-based approach. There are two ways to define a `class` in TypeScript: through declaration or expression.

**Try It!**
While learning about classes, be sure to add the code into your `AngularL02` project that you created in the setup section earlier in this lesson!

[Next](./4.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./2.md)
