# Classes - Continued

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/305134421.hd.mp4?s=5a65e94bfb0e05381d96008aec157f830910326a&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Class Declaration

When creating a `class`, you can **declare** it by using the `class` keyword, followed by the name of the class itself.

Below, is a class named `Rectangle` that has been **declared** with the class keyword:

**index.ts** file:

```ts
class Rectangle {
  height: number;
  width: number;
  constructor(height: number, width: number) {
    this.height = height;
    this.width = width;
  }

  perimeter() {
    return this.height * 2 + this.width * 2;
  }
}
```

The `class` declaration above includes three parts (within the curly `{}` braces):

- Two properties — `height` and `weight` — are each declared as a `number`.
- A `constructor` (discussed below).
- A method named `perimeter` that multiplies the `height` and `width` properties by 2 and then adds them together.
  While this is a very common way of creating a `class`, there are two other ways to create a `class`.

## Class Expression

Another way to create a `class` is by creating a **class expression**. Creating this expression can be done in one of two ways: _named_ or _unnamed_. When creating a `class expression`, it looks very similar to creating a `variable`, as you need to use the `const` or `let` keywords.

## Unnamed Class Example

Below, is an example of an `unnamed` class expression:

```ts
const Rectangle = class {
  height: number;
  width: number;
  constructor(height: number, width: number) {
    this.height = height;
    this.width = width;
  }

  perimeter() {
    return this.height * 2 + this.width * 2;
  }
};
```

Above, instead of _declaring_ the `class`, you are creating a `variable` and setting it to the `class` itself. The reason it is `unnamed`, is because the `class` doesn't have a name; only the `variable` does.

## Named Class Example

Below, is an example of a `named` class expression:

```ts
const Rectangle = class Rectangle {
  height: number;
  width: number;
  constructor(height: number, width: number) {
    this.height = height;
    this.width = width;
  }

  perimeter() {
    return this.height * 2 + this.width * 2;
  }
};
```

As you can see, the only difference between an `unnamed` and a `named` class expression, is the `class` name located after the `class` keyword.

## Class Constructor

The **class constructor** is a unique `method` that is used for creating and initializing an `object` of a `class`. When using a constructor within a `class`, you may only have **one** `constructor` per `class`. Otherwise, you will get an error. When working with a `constructor`, you can use the `super` keyword to access `constructors` from Parent classes (remember you can extend a `class` from another `class`).

Constructors are **_not_** required. They are optional.

**Additional Info!**
If you would like to read more about **constructors**, please visit: [MDN web docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes/constructor).

[Next](./5.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./3.md)
