# Overview

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/255108970.hd.mp4?s=d19a8b84df142ad33bafefb212fcc234299c4174&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Angular Logo

"Angular is a platform that makes it easy to build applications with the web. Angular combines declarative templates, dependency injection, end-to-end tooling, and integrated best practices to solve development challenges. Angular empowers developers to build applications that live on the web, mobile, or the desktop" - Angular Docs

Angular is a structural framework for dynamic web applications. It lets you use your previous knowledge of HTML to create a template for components. With options like data binding and dependency injection, Angular provides plenty of features out of the box that would otherwise need to be created and implemented with a vast amount of JavaScript. By using Angular, developers can access these features and more without having to reinvent the wheel. Angular has been in production since October 20, 2010, and has continued to grow due to its open source community. The Angular content you will be learning in this course is relevant to version 2.0 or higher (known as Angular2), but it is not compatible with Angular version 1.0, more commonly known as AngularJS.

Angular Command Line Interface Tool
Angular Developers created the Angular Commands Line Interface Tool to help with Angular development. This command line interface (CLI) tool can be used to; create a project, add files, and, perform a variety of tasks essential to the development of an Angular project. By this point in the course, you should have the correct versions of Node (at least version 8.9) and NPM (at least version 5.5.1) installed on your machine; these are needed to download the Angular CLI.

Proper tools make application development faster and easier to maintain rather than if you did everything by hand, this is why the Angular team developed the Angular CLI tool. Continue onto the next page where you will find the steps you need to take to install the Angular CLI tool, as well as creating a new Angular application using the CLI tool.

[Next](./2.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)
