# The Internet of Things (IoT)

The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the ability of physical objects to communicate over the Internet using embedded computing devices.

Analyst firm Gartner predicts there will be nearly 20.8 billion “things” on the Internet of Things by 2020. Through the use of sensors and monitors, these objects will be able to inform individuals, companies, communities, countries, and humanity in general about conditions in their environment. Many believe the Internet of Things will provide the keys to unlock solutions to minor inconveniences, moderate disconcerting issues, as well as serious global threats.

The Internet of Things (IoT)

Source: Courtesy of Nike Attribution: Fair Use
The Internet of Things began several years ago with technologies such as RFID, which allows companies to track inventory through the supply chain, and smart power meters, which provide individuals and communities with detailed information about power consumption. Just as smart meters offer new insight into ways that people can save energy, smart objects of all sorts are popping up to provide all sorts of benefits and services.

Smart objects (physical objects that contain embedded computing devices) are growing in number and variety. Fitness bands, smartwatches, and clothing gather information about the wearer and environment, which is used as input for health apps that record a person’s daily physical activity level. A smart home contains smart appliances that allow the homeowner to easily monitor and manipulate lighting, security, irrigation, temperature, and any other electronically supported resource from an Internet-connected device. When smart objects are connected to the Internet, they join the Internet of Things.

Smart objects often include sensors to relay information about their environment. For example, a smart parking lot collects information from sensors in each parking space, which allows it to inform newcomers if and where a space is available. People may or may not be involved in the communication from smart objects. For example, a smart irrigation system utilizes sensors to gauge soil moisture and weather patterns in order to turn sprinklers on at just the right time for just the right duration. Manufacturers are empowering machinery with sensors and intelligence to avoid bottlenecks on the production line.

The Internet of Things is being harnessed to assist with monitoring water quality, atmospheric conditions, geological phenomena like seismic activity and ocean currents, and even the movement of wildlife. We use IoT to monitor infrastructures such as bridges, railway tracks, and on- and offshore wind farms. As already mentioned, manufacturers and communities are saving money with information from the IoT, as are the medical/healthcare and transportation sectors. Tech companies are preparing to develop a whole new generation of apps based on the information gleaned from the IoT.

The Internet of Things has caused concern in two primary areas: privacy and network bandwidth. Some networking companies are developing an entirely new network structure, apart from our Internet, to accommodate the IoT. Cisco has proposed a platform it calls the Internet of Everything that integrates the networking needs of people, processes, data, and things. Various industries are also working on assuring privacy in the IoT era. Ford, GM, Mercedes, Toyota, and several other automakers have agreed to adopt new auto-industry privacy guidelines to govern the information collected by computer systems in vehicles.

Review and Practice
Below you will find a quiz to review the recently covered material, there are 2 questions. Quizzes will be graded.
