# The Web

Web technologies are the hardware, software, and protocols that allow the web to exist.

Recall that the web, short for World Wide Web, is an Internet service that provides convenient access to information and services through hyperlinks. The emergence of the web in the early 1990s transformed the Internet from an information and communications tool accessible only to researchers and academics into what it is today: a primary source of information, communication, and entertainment for billions. Before the invention of the web, the Internet was a complicated system that was navigated primarily from a command prompt, requiring commands that needed to be learned and memorized and accessing only a limited set of documents and services. Because of its ingenious and easy-to-use design, the web has become the primary tool for accessing information and services of all kinds.

While the terms web and Internet are often used interchangeably, the two are technically different entities. You’ve learned that the Internet is a collection of hardware, protocols, and software for connecting networks. The web, on the other hand, is a service provided utilizing the Internet. One can think of it as an additional network layer that runs on top of the Internet. The Internet existed long before the web and can continue to exist without the web. The web, however, cannot exist without the Internet.

The World Wide Web was developed by Tim Berners-Lee between 1989 and 1991 in his research at CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research (in French, Le Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire) in Geneva and was released to the public in the form of the Mosaic web browser in 1993. What Berners-Lee originally conceived of as an organizational tool to help keep track of his own personal documents has grown into an organizational tool with an easy-to-use graphical interface that helps billions of users share and access information on the Internet—and, in fact, allows you to take this course!

The key to Berners-Lee’s system was the ability to link together documents to allow navigation from one document to related documents. The process of “linking together” documents from diverse sources requires three components:

A defined system for linking the documents
Protocols that allow different computers to communicate
Tools to help create the documents and the links between them
Tim Berners-Lee came up with all three: hyperlinks for linking documents; the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP); and HTML, a language for creating and linking documents.

The cornerstone of Tim Berners-Lee’s World Wide Web is the hyperlink. A hyperlink is an element in an online document—a word, phrase, or image—that, when clicked, opens a related online document. Relating documents to each other using hyperlinks forms a web of interrelated information that is logically arranged and easy to explore.

The protocol of the web is called HTTP. The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) controls communication between web clients and servers. A web client, usually called a web browser, takes the form of software such as Internet Explorer/Edge, Safari, Firefox, or Chrome and is used to request web pages from web servers. A web server stores and delivers web pages and other web resources such as interactive web content.

Since Berners-Lee invented the web, many new technologies have been developed that work with his original design to deliver richer, interactive online experiences, which include animation, video, 3D views of objects and locations, music, and apps. In this section you’ll learn about web technologies from basic to state-of-the-art.

URL (Uniform Resource Locator)
A uniform resource locator, more commonly called a URL, acts as a web page address, incorporating the domain name of the web server and the location of the web page file on the server.

URL

"url-22" by J_O_I_D is licensed under CC BY 2.0
The URL makes it possible to attach meaningful names to otherwise technical numeric Internet addresses. Imagine having to remember 54.239.25.200 rather than www.amazon.com!

Webpages are identified and accessed by people using a URL. A URL acts as a web page address, incorporating the domain name of the web server and the location of the web page file on the server. The URL http://www.techminded.co/kenbaldauf/about/index.php can be dissected as follows:

URL Dissection
Protocol Web server Domain name Location on server Requested file
http:// www. techminded.co/ kenbaldauf/about/ index.php
The final portion of the domain name .com, .co, .edu, .biz, and so on is called the top-level domain (TLD). Top-level domains classify Internet locations by type or, in the case of international websites, by location. There are hundreds of TLDs.

URLs are translated into a numeric IP address by DNS servers located on the Internet. The domain name system was established to support the use of URLs and to translate URLs into IP addresses.

The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, or IANA, is responsible for managing URLs and IP addresses. IANA is an affiliate of ICANN, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, which is the central governing body of the Internet. Decisions made by ICANN affect everyone on the Internet.

HTML (Hypertext Markup Language)
Hypertext Markup Language is the primary markup language used to specify the formatting of a webpage.

HTML 5

"DSC_0005" by slavik_V is licensed under CC BY 2.0
HTML provides a simple language for creating attractive web pages and is accessible to anyone with a desire to learn it. The fact that HTML is nonproprietary and simple to use, with free tools such as a text editor and a web browser, makes it a perfect tool for anyone in the world who wishes to contribute to the vast pool of information on the web.

A markup language is used to describe how information is to be displayed. It typically combines the information, such as text and images, with instructions for formatting. The primary markup language used to specify the formatting of a webpage is called Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). Webpages are sometimes called HTML documents. HTML uses tags to describe the formatting of a page. An HTML tag is a specific command inside angle brackets (< >) that tells a web browser how to display items on a page. Most HTML tags use opening and closing versions. The closing tag is indicated by a forward slash. HTML commands operate on whatever is between the opening and closing tags. Thus, “Welcome to my website!” tells the browser to display the phrase “Welcome to my website!” in a bold font.

Although HTML documents were originally created by typing tags and content into a text editor, today most web developers use software tools that automate much of the production of HTML code. Web development software, such as Adobe Dreamweaver, allows designers to more easily create high-quality, attractive web pages. You can also use free online tools from WordPress and Wix to create websites without knowing anything about HTML. But, learning HTML empowers users to create web pages that are unique and specific to the task.

Today’s commercial webpages use a combination of HTML, CSS, a wide variety of web programming languages, and sometimes database technologies to create webpages and sites. The latest version of HTML, HTML5, provides greater support for media and more powerful applications, and it will likely reduce the need for browser plug-ins to view various forms of media.

CSS (Cascading Style Sheets)
Cascading Style Sheets or CSS, allows easy application of visual styles for fonts, colors, layouts, and other page attributes to create visual themes for web pages and sites.

To provide a consistent visual design and appearance across multiple pages on a website, web designers use a technology called Cascading Style Sheets. CSS uses special HTML tags to globally define typography, colors, and page layout of the webpages.

So, rather than having to specify visual characteristics for each page of a website individually, formatting can be specified once and applied to all webpages. CSS styles are often defined in a separate file and applied to many pages on a website.

Cascading Style Sheets

Source: Florida State University Attribution: Fair Use
Good website design includes a consistent appearance across all pages of a website. Web developers designed CSS technology to save development time, allow for easy changes to a website’s design, and allow pages to load quickly.

Before CSS, web developers were required to define the design of each page repeatedly in each HTML file in a website, using HTML tags. When the design of the site needed to be updated, each page in the site would require editing.

CSS allows the style for each page of a website to be stored in a .css file. Each page on the site links to the .css file. Changes to a .css file affect the design of all pages on the site. More advanced site designs may incorporate multiple .css files, but the advantages are the same.

CSS supports the customization of specific HTML tags. For instance, a developer can have all links on a site use a red font that turns bold when the mouse pointer hovers over them by styling the <a> HTML tag that identifies links. With CSS, developers can also create new tags that define the visual style of blocks of text. CSS also allows objects to be placed in specific locations on a page and even layered on top of each other. All visual aspects of a page can be specified in CSS, leaving HTML to define the page content. The figure above illustrates how many of today’s websites would look with HTML alone, if the CSS code were removed.

The latest version of CSS, CSS3, incorporates powerful tools that allow page designs to adjust to the size of the user’s display. Using a technique called responsive design, a single website design can adapt to accommodate a notebook display size, a tablet or smartphone display size, or a hi-def TV display size. CSS3 also supports other advanced visual design features, such as semi-transparent backgrounds, gradient fills, rounded corners, and shadow effects. CSS3, combined with HTML5, provides the necessary tools to produce web page designs of all types.

Really Simple Syndication (RSS)
Really Simple Syndication, or RSS, is a web technology used to automatically deliver frequently updated web content, such as blogs, podcasts, and news, in a standardized fashion.

Really Simple Syndication

LogoRSS" by Ricardo Moctezuma is licensed under CC BY 2.0
Many web users have favorite sources of information they frequent online. A user may have a dozen or so sources of online information that are updated weekly, daily, or even several times a day. Rather than spending a lot of time visiting each source of information, RSS can be used to subscribe to those sources of information and access them all from one central RSS reader application.

Using RSS, subscribers can have daily updates of their favorite blogs and news services delivered to their desktop. RSS uses XML to deliver web content that changes on a regular basis. It is ideal for keeping up with blogs and online news. Programs and apps called aggregators or RSS readers can be downloaded, installed, and used to subscribe to blogs. Each time an RSS reader is launched, it collects the latest articles from the locations to which you subscribe.

Websites that support RSS feeds are often marked by a small, orange, rectangular icon showing XML or RSS, like the one shown in the top figure. Websites that support RSS feeds include The New York Times, Google News, Quotes of the Day, CNET News, Scientific American, and thousands of other sources, both popular and obscure. The New York Times, in particular, provides its readers with RSS feeds to all of its content. Clicking the icon typically provides the user with options for subscribing. Alternatively, you can copy the link from the RSS page into the reader of your choice to subscribe.

Podcasts and video podcasts are also distributed using RSS technology. Software called a podcast aggregator or a podcast manager uses RSS to allow you to subscribe to your favorite podcasts from one central application. RSS allows programs like This American Life to be downloaded automatically to iTunes and your iPhone. Apple iTunes is the most popular and easy-to-use podcast manager. Other podcast managers include Juice and Doppler.
