# Web Software

One of the advantages of the web is that the wide variety of tools available for building websites can also be used for more general applications, such as those that have traditionally been purchased and installed on a user’s local machine. By building on top of the infrastructure of the Internet and the many available tools, much of the work we associate with single-user computing can be moved off the desktop and into the Cloud.

Web Browser
A web browser, or just browser (sometimes called a web client), such as Chrome, Internet Explorer/Edge, Safari, or Firefox, is used to request web pages from web servers, interpret the HTML code in the webpage that is delivered, and display the content as defined by the HTML onscreen. Web browsers provide access to the millions of resources available on the Internet. Utilizing web technologies, browsers make it possible to view information in the form of text and images, watch animation and video, listen to music and audio, and interact with web apps. During the past two decades, web browsers have grown in capabilities and importance to the point where they have become a platform for all types of computing.

Web Software

Source: Courtesy of Google Attribution: Fair Use
From the user’s perspective, a web browser is an easy-to-use application for finding and enjoying content on the Internet. Using hyperlinks, web surfers can easily browse through interrelated documents and media, often wandering from one topic to another. The web browser is a wonderful tool for discovery and learning because, by its nature, it presents relationships between topics that may not otherwise be apparent.

Browsing the web is such an intuitive and fluid activity that web users seldom consider what is actually occurring behind the scenes as they surf. Web browsers communicate with web servers using the HTTP protocol. When a web user types in a web address or URL or clicks a link on a page, the web browser sends a request to the web server that has the page or resources being requested. The server then provides the webpage and associated files to the browser. The web browser interprets the HTML and CSS code in the webpage file and displays the page contents according to the instructions provided by the code.

Web browsers have been designed for nearly every type of Internet-connected device. Desktop and notebook computers, tablets, smartphones, and wearables all access the web through browsers.

Internet Explorer/Edge, Chrome, Safari, and Firefox are the most popular web browsers. In recent years, Google Chrome has overtaken the others in popularity. Safari is a popular mobile browser since it is the default browser on iPhones and iPads. All browsers provide similar features: tabs for open pages, bookmarks, browsing history, continuity across devices, and private browsing. The significant differences between browsers have to do with the speed in which pages are loaded, the security provided against malware and identity theft, and privacy settings, such as the option to prevent companies from tracking your web activities. Opera is a browser that is appreciated by a small percentage of users for its built-in security and privacy features.

Accessing information is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to web browser value. Increasingly, the web browser is the platform for the most common computing uses, such as communication and applications. Google has developed the Chrome operating system that does nothing more than act as a web browser running on notebooks called Chromebooks. Using a Chromebook, you can browse the web; access email through Gmail; mind your Google Calendar; work on docs, spreadsheets, and presentations with Google Apps; listen to music; watch movies; play games; read books; manage your photos; and conduct many other common computing activities using apps designed for the platform.

Web Server
The term web server refers to software that fulfills web page requests from web clients and to the computers that run such software.

The client/server architecture is fundamental to providing Internet-based services. Without servers, Internet users would have little access to information other than their own. With the increased use of Cloud computing, even your own data may be inaccessible without servers. Web servers supply every item requested from a web browser, including information, movies, music, games, software, and services. Without web servers, your web browser window would always be empty.

Web server software runs on a variety of types of computers. Google, for example, combines tens of thousands of PCs in clusters to act as web servers for its search engines. Facebook utilizes dozens of motherboards combined in large cabinets in an energy-saving design. Facebook makes its server design available for other companies to use through an open-source program called the Open Compute Project. Servers are housed in data centers, sometimes called server farms. A server farm owned by Apple, Facebook, Microsoft, Amazon, or Google could house tens of thousands of servers.

Servers don’t necessarily have to be large collections of computers. You can set up your own PC to be a web server; you can even install web server software on a USB thumb drive and have a “server on a stick.” The point is that hardware does not define a web server; rather, the software running on the hardware does. A computer running web server software is called a web server.

The most popular web server software today is Apache, followed by Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS) for Windows Server, and others taking less significant amounts of the market. Web server software runs on computers that are typically always powered on and connected to the Internet, with backup power supplies and redundant systems to provide uninterrupted service.

Web servers receive HTTP webpage requests from clients and retrieve the data being requested from connected file systems, forwarding that data to the web clients. Web servers typically have other software and systems tools installed to support web-related services, such as programming languages and databases.

A web hosting company, or web host, is a company that provides web server services to individuals and businesses interested in maintaining an online presence. Web hosting companies typically charge a monthly or yearly fee according to the amount of web traffic anticipated for the site and the amount of storage space required. Rates can be as low as $5 per month for a personal site or hundreds of dollars a month for a commercial site. Besides providing basic storage and server services, web hosts, such as Hostmonster.com, may also offer Internet and web technologies, such as FTP, SFTP, SSH, SSL, email services, and support for development platforms and languages like PHP, MySQL, Perl, Python, C, C++, Java, Ruby, and WordPress.

Web Development Software
Web development software allows developers to create web pages more easily using a word-processing-style environment and automating complex coding activities.

Web development technologies have become involved and complex. Web development software, front-end frameworks, and content management systems automate the web development process, making it more manageable and accessible.

Web Development Software

Source: Adobe Attribution: Fair Use
When the web was new, creating websites was the domain of techies who took the time to learn HTML and related technologies. Today, anyone who can use a word processor can create professional quality websites with little time and effort. Web development software enables you to create HTML documents using word-processor-like software. Rather than having to type out HTML tags to create web page formatting, you define the formatting using standard menu commands in a what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) editor. WYSIWYG (pronounced “wizzie-wig”) implies that the webpage you design with the web development software will look the same when published on the web. When you save your webpage, the software creates an HTML file with the appropriate tags. Adobe Dreamweaver is a particularly popular web development software that provides powerful tools for building professional interactive web pages and sites.

Many of today’s websites contain standard features, whicht are complicated, to create from scratch. These include navigation bars with dropdown menus, animation effects such as parallax scrolling (where the background scrolls slower than the foreground), and responsive features that change the page design based on the display size. Web front-end frameworks are available to provide many of the common but complicated design features. By using the CSS and JavaScript files from frameworks like Bootstrap, Foundation, Skeleton, and others, a developer gets a huge head start on the design process. In fact, most developers use frameworks rather than beginning a project from scratch. There are also thousands of visual themes available for free or to purchase that provide a wide variety of design styles on top of these frameworks.

Bootstrap

Source: Wrap Bootstrap Attribution: Fair Use
There are also online tools that make building a website as easy as point and click. Sites like wix.com and wordpress.com provide hundreds of design themes to choose from. Add your own content and images and you have your own personalized, professional website. These online tools are considered content management systems (CMS) because they store the website content in a database and load it into the visual theme only when a user requests a page. Content is loaded into the website using a convenient dashboard interface.

Wordpress

Source: Courtesy of WordPress and Ken Baldauf Attribution: Fair Use
Cookie
A cookie, sometimes called an HTTP cookie, is a small text file placed on a user’s computer by a web server in order to identify the user whenever he or she returns to visit a website.

Have you ever had a webpage greet you by name? Many of today’s commercial websites are created on the fly—that is, the webpage is custom-created when the user arrives to match his or her interests. For example, if you have made purchases at Amazon.com, you may notice that each time you visit the site, you are greeted by name and presented with advertisements for products similar to those you have purchased before. Amazon and many websites use a technology called cookies to custom-create a webpage just for you. Cookies can also be used by companies to track a web user’s online habits in order to build a customer profile on which to base behavioral targeting and advertising. Cookies enable a web server to identify visitors to websites—a useful service to those who visit websites and those who provide web content. But this ability can also be seen as a threat to a user’s security and privacy.

HTTP is classified as a stateless protocol. Stateless refers to the fact that a web server does not retain information (a particular state) regarding a user between visits. In other words, each time your web browser requests data from a web server, that web server has no idea who you are, what you are doing, or what you’ve previously requested of the server. The server treats every request as a new transaction and every visitor as a new visitor, no matter how many times a person has visited the site.

This is a problem for web developers and businesses who want to create relationships with the people who visit their websites. It is also an inconvenience to users who must reestablish their identity every time they visit a website. Cookies were invented to solve this problem.

Cookies

Source: Courtesy of Google Attribution: Fair Use
Today’s web browsers allow web servers to store small cookie files on your computer or mobile device. When you revisit a website, even though your computer may have a different IP address than the last time you visited, the website can recognize you by reading its associated cookie file from your PC or device. Cookie files can contain data or perhaps a unique identifier that is used to look up your personal profile in a database on the server.

Information accessed through cookies can include your name, address, and other personal information, items you’ve previously purchased at the website, items you’ve viewed on the website, and the amount of time that you viewed each item. This information is obtained through tracking your activities at the website and from form data that you’ve submitted. By collecting this information over time, a detailed user profile can be developed and used to cater to your individual tastes each time you visit the website.

Some worry that cookies threaten security and privacy. While most companies track a user’s activities only within the company’s own website, some web advertisers use cookies to track a user across many websites. These types of cookies are called third-party cookies because they are not placed on a computer by the company that owns the site, but by a third-party company that provides advertisements on the site. For example, if you’re reading The New York Times online edition, the page you’re on will often deposit a cookie that comes from both The New York Times as well as DoubleClick, the ad agency that placed the ads. Tracking a user’s activities across many websites can reveal a lot of personal information. Chrome, Firefox, Internet Explorer/Edge, and Safari are working to provide users with an option for blocking third-party cookies and to offer a “Do Not Track” option for use with websites that support the option.

Cookies are also often used by professionals working in computer forensics. Cookies stored on computers confiscated by law enforcement agencies can provide evidence for use in criminal prosecutions.

Plug-in
A plug-in, also called an extension or add-on, works with a web browser to offer extended services such as audio players, video, animation, 3D graphics viewers, and interactive media.

When the web was invented, its designers had no idea that it would cause such a sensation and become a platform to deliver all types of digital media and services. HTML was designed to simply show pages that include text and images. Rather than continuously upgrading HTML, web browsers, and web servers to accommodate different types of media and activities, plug-in software was developed by a variety of vendors to extend the capabilities of existing web technologies. Bucking this tradition, HTML5 was developed to support media and has reduced the need for plug-ins.

Plugins

Source: Google Attribution: Fair Use
The web was originally designed to serve up text and image files. To employ more advanced web content, or what some in the industry call rich content, such as video and interactive media, a helper application called a plug-in may be required. A plug-in works with a web browser to offer extended services to support digital audio, digital video and animation, 3D graphics viewers, and interactive media and apps.

Plug-ins are also sometimes called add-ons or extensions. When a webpage contains content that requires a plug-in, you are typically provided with the opportunity to download and install the necessary plug-in at no cost, if you don’t already have it. Adobe Flash is a popular plug-in that enables users to view animations and videos and interact with games and other multimedia content created with the Flash program.

Adobe Flash Player, Acrobat Reader, Microsoft Silverlight, and Java Runtime Environment are some popular plug-ins that you’ve probably had to download to view some web content. These plug-ins support specific kinds of documents and applications that are delivered on the web.

More recent plug-ins act more like apps for the browser. For example, there are password plug-ins that help you manage all of your passwords and automatically fill them in for you when required. There are shopping plug-ins that automatically offer you coupons to save you money when shopping online. There’s a Dropbox plug-in so that you can easily access documents stored in your Dropbox account. Check the links below to discover plug-ins and extensions for your favorite browser.
