# Web Programming

Web programming refers to the development of software written to run either in a web browser or on a web server, using web-based input and output.

Web Programming

Source: Pixlr Attribution: Fair Use
Software is used on the web to provide a wide range of services. When you use a web search engine, your keywords are used as input for a program that searches a database for related websites. Web-based software processes all kinds of data submitted through web forms, including purchases at online stores, bids on products at eBay, insurance quotes, emails to friends, updates on Facebook, seat reservations for concerts or ball games, and stock purchases and trades.

Web programs and software have become increasingly sophisticated. Today, many web-delivered programs, or web apps, are nearly as powerful as their desktop counterparts. Web apps offer the additional benefits of being available from any Internet-connected device and of serving as a collaborative framework for sharing data and files among multiple Internet users. Companies like Pixlr provide photo-editing software that runs in the web browser. Doodle.com produces a popular web app for polling a group to find the best time for a meeting.

Java is an object-oriented programming language that enables software engineers to create programs that run on any computer platform. JavaScript is similar to Java in that it provides functionality on web pages through programming code that is embedded in an HTML document. However, the two languages are very different. Java is a full-fledged programming language for all computing environments, but JavaScript was developed specifically for the web. Ajax, which stands for Asynchronous JavaScript and XML, is a popular and powerful web development platform used to create web apps such as Google Docs and Google Maps. Ajax allows the user to interact with a program without needing to frequently reload web pages. A special set of JavaScript functions called jQuery has become very popular for creating animated web page effects.

JavaScript and its derivatives create programming code that runs in the browser after being delivered by the server. These are called client-side programs. Java, PHP, Perl, C++, and many other programming languages and scripting languages are used to develop software that runs on a web server using the web browser as a user interface. These are called server-side programs.

There is somewhat of a battle being waged between installed apps, also called native apps—designed for specific devices such as the iPhone, Windows Phone, or Android devices—and web apps designed to run on any device in the mobile browser. So far, installed apps are winning the battle because they are able to offer features customized to the device and also run more smoothly and quickly. Many feel that eventually web apps will acquire similar abilities. In fact, Google is betting on it!

Cloud Computing
Cloud computing delivers a variety of computing resources from the Internet as a service for free or for a fee to relieve users from the burden of installing, maintaining, and securing those resources themselves

Pervasive and reliable high-speed Internet connections have led to a new generation of computing where computing activities take place on Internet servers accessed through a web browser. Applications like Facebook, Google Docs, Office Online, Gmail, and YouTube, as well as business applications like Salesforce and IBM Cognos, allow individuals and businesses to access powerful applications without needing to install software. Increasingly, computer processing and storage are moving off of PCs and into the cloud.

The beauty of cloud computing is that users access services from their own computers or mobile devices but don’t have to be concerned with installation, maintenance, or security. Cloud computing derives its name from the depiction of the Internet as a cloud in networking diagrams, a vague structure to or from which data is uploaded or downloaded without the users having to know the details of the process.

Amazon.com played an important role in developing the cloud-computing model. The company found that it typically utilized only 10 percent of its server resources because it had to be prepared for extremely busy periods when demand shot up to 90 percent. The company developed a cloud architecture that accommodated peaks in demand and shifted the load to other activities during slower periods. The company gained huge benefits in efficiency through its new server architecture and started leasing out server resources to outside companies. Today, Amazon is not only the largest online retail store, but it is also one of the largest suppliers of cloud services. Another company using the cloud-computing model is Salesforce.com, which has created a popular enterprise cloud-computing service that provides customer relationship management (CRM) software in the cloud.

Many people take for granted the wide variety of web apps available and the fact that their data is often stored on servers owned by companies like Facebook and Google. Not many consider the benefits of cloud computing to businesses. Businesses manage huge collections of data, utilizing complex information systems that require expensive servers and an army of technicians to support them. Cloud computing offers an opportunity for businesses to outsource all of it and lease the service for a flat monthly fee. Since cloud service providers are dedicated to the business of computing, they are able to invest more in maintenance and development.

There are some drawbacks to cloud computing, mainly in the areas of access, privacy, and security. Many cloud services are only accessible when the user is connected to the Internet. So, business travelers with intermittent Internet access could suffer. However, the amount of time anyone spends without Internet access is becoming less and less, and cloud service suppliers are working to support work offline. Another issue has to do with lack of control over the data. Some worry that cloud service companies will not adequately secure their data.

They may also fear that sensitive information stored in the cloud could be subject to snooping eyes. In fact, government agencies have declined some cloud services because they do not meet government regulations for privacy and security. Many cloud companies, including Amazon and Google, have worked to become certified for government use.

Cloud Services
Cloud services include computing services provided over the Internet in three categories: infrastructure, platform, and application.

Cloud Services

"BMC on SaaS" by Michael Coté is licensed under CC BY 2.0
There are many levels at which cloud computing provides services. There are thousands of cloud applications, many of which are well known. Cloud computing can go deeper than just software; it can also offer an entire computing platform, operating system and all. Even deeper than that, it can offer hardware for storage, security, and networking.

The application category of cloud computing isn’t as new as you might think. It has been around in business environments for over a decade and is referred to as Software as a Service or SaaS. It is only since Web 2.0 brought technologies that allow web browsers to act like installed software that the term cloud computing was coined. SaaS originally required software to be installed on local computers in order to access services on the Internet. With the recent release of powerful web development technologies like JavaScript and Ajax, developers were able to create full-fledged applications to run in the web browser window. This allowed users to access software simply by calling up a web address in the browser. These technologies provided the fuel to launch the cloud computing era. Today, software from basic tools like calendar apps to heavy enterprise tools like business intelligence apps run on web servers and are accessed from browsers.

Increasingly, personal computing is moving to the cloud. Amazon Drive, Apple iCloud, and Google Play services provide ample online storage for music and media that can be accessed from any Internet-connected device. Similarly, cloud services are available for businesses with large amounts of data and enterprise considerations. Amazon Web Services (AWS) is a popular cloud service for thousands of businesses.

Some cloud services offer a computing platform to access over the Internet. Platform as a Service (PaaS) provides access to an operating system desktop running in a virtual machine on a server. Using PaaS, a person could run software on a Windows PC from their Linux desktop. This setup is especially useful for developers who develop software for multiple platforms. PaaS is also useful for web hosting. Many hosting companies provide complete virtual servers for hosting customer’s websites.

Finally, Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) provides hardware resources to users over the Internet. This is especially useful for storage. A business can outsource all its data storage with an IaaS provider that encrypts and secures the data behind a firewall. IaaS relieves a company of having to manage storage media, data backups, and security.

Cloud Model
There are several cloud models that serve various environments, including private clouds, community clouds, public clouds, and hybrid clouds. While most users are familiar with public cloud services like Google Apps or iCloud, they may not be familiar with other models of importance to businesses and organizations. There are four models for cloud computing: public, private, community, and hybrid.

Cloud Model

Source: Rackspace Attribution: Fair Use
The public cloud model makes a cloud service available to the general public. This is the model most of us use and are familiar with. The service may be free or require a monthly fee. Businesses, however, may not wish to have their cloud service shared with anyone else. In such a case, a business could set up a private cloud.

A private cloud may be created on-premises or hosted by a service provider. In either case, the cloud is provided for one company alone. Rackspace, for example, offers private cloud services for data center management. The cloud saves a business like Rackspace money by pooling server resources and growing and shrinking as needed. Many businesses are transforming their own data centers and information systems to the private cloud model.

In some cases, a private cloud may be expanded to serve multiple businesses or organizations. It then becomes a community cloud. Businesses that have common interests can experience additional savings by pooling their cloud resources. When different types of cloud services are connected, the result is a hybrid cloud.
