# Interfaces

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/304904723.hd.mp4?s=b2701641e976f3a26123e0ab778a61e771a72413&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In TypeScript, using a typing system is one of the main principles. While defining `types` is very useful, it is also helpful to allow for the definition of a structure which can include several different properties with their types defined, this is what an `interface` is. **Interfaces** are essentially blueprints of `types` that are easily reused or updated throughout your application. They are similar to JavaScript `objects` because they contain a `property` and a `value`, but the value in an `interface` is the `type definition` of the property. Much like the other data types, **interfaces** are only a part of TypeScript and _not_ JavaScript. So, when the TypeScript file compiles into JavaScript, they will not exist in the `.js` file.

## Creating an Interface Example

Below is an example of an interface which defines what it requires to make a sandwich. An interface is specified with the interface keyword followed by the name of the interface itself. Then, within the curly brackets {}, the property names and types are defined.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
interface ingredientsBasket {
  numberOfItems: number;
  ingredients: string[];
  calories: number;
}
```

- Above, there are three properties, each with their own type:
- - the property numberOfItems has a type of number
- - the property ingredients has a type of an array of strings
- - the property calories has a type of number
    Once the interface has been defined, it can now be used throughout the application like any other data type.

## Using an Interface Example

Next, you are going to see how an interface is used as the type for a function's parameter. Consider the following code.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
interface ingredientsBasket {
  numberOfItems: number;
  ingredients: string[];
  calories: number;
}

function makeASandwich(ingredients: ingredientsBasket): void {
  console.log(
    "Your sandwich includes " +
      ingredients.numberOfItems +
      " items of " +
      ingredients.ingredients +
      ", which comes out to be a total of " +
      ingredients.calories +
      " calories."
  );
}

const sandwichIngredients = {
  numberOfItems: 3,
  ingredients: ["bacon", "lettuce", "tomato"],
  calories: 320,
};

makeASandwich(sandwichIngredients);
```

- First, the interface is defined.
- Next, the function makeASandwich is defined. What is different here is that the function takes in one parameter, ingredients, and the type defined for that parameter is the interface you created above.
- - Rather than having three parameters and defining each of their types separately, you can set them within an interface and use the entire interface as the type.
- - The function also includes a console.log that uses the properties within the parameter to send back a message with the values defined.
- - - Because the function only includes a console.log, it has a return type of void.
- - Third, an object is created named sandwichIngredients that has the same properties as the ingredientsBasket interface. But because this is an actual object, the values are the actual values needed to create a sandwich, not the type definitions.
- - - Notice that the types of the values are the same as the interface types.
- - Lastly, the function is invoked with the sandwichIngredients as its one parameter.
    Because the function uses the ingredientsBasket interface as its type, each of the values within the sandwichIngredients objects must be the same type as what was defined in the interface. The output of the above function is the following:

```terminal
Your sandwich includes 3 items of bacon, lettuce, tomato, which comes out to be a total of 320 calories.
```

**Tip!**
Often, interfaces are defined in their own files and then imported into other files where they are needed, this allows for a very organized application. But for this lesson, you will be keeping the interfaces within the index.ts file.

## Optional Properties

So far, the properties defined within the interfaces have been required. In the above example where you are using the ingredientsBasket as the type for the parameter of the function, each property defined within that interface must be defined when the function is invoked. If, for example, you only defined two of the three properties within the sandwichIngredients object, TypeScript would give you an error when you run the code. If at any point you decide that a property within an interface doesn't necessarily need to be defined, that is where Optional Properties come into play!

When using Optional Properties, the question mark (?) is used to denote an optional property, as shown below.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
interface ingredientsBasket {
  numberOfItems: number;
  ingredients: string[];
  calories?: number;
}
```

In the above interface, adding a question mark before the colon makes the calories property optional.
If you were to use this interface, you would not have to define the number of calories; it could be omitted because of the ?.
Readonly Properties
Along with optional properties, you can assign properties to be readonly, this means that once the property is assigned, it cannot be reassigned. Sometimes, it is necessary for a few properties only to be assigned a value when an object is first created.

To make a readonly property, you add the readonly keyword before the property name, as shown below.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
interface ingredientsBasket {
  readonly numberOfItems: number;
  ingredients: string[];
  calories?: number;
}
```

Above, the numberOfItems property is readonly and once it has been defined, it cannot be reassigned.
Since the numberOfItems property is readonly, you cannot do the following.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
let club: ingredientsBasket = {
  numberOfItems: 3,
  ingredients: ["Turkey", "Ham", "Bacon"],
};

club.numberOfItems = "My Favorite"; // This will throw an error.
```

- Once this application is run, there will be an error, as shown below:

- The above error is saying numberOfItems can not be assigned due to it being a readonly property.

## Review Quiz

### Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material.

1.  You can use an `interface` to type-define a structure (define the types for all of its properties).

    A. True

    B. False

2.  Using TypeScript, you will get an error if you do not define the type of a variable.

    A. True

    B. False

3.  Which statement below is valid for defining a read-only property in an interface?

    A. `readonly status: number`

    B. `read-only status: number`

    C. `status: number readonly`

    D. `status: number read-only`

4.  An `interface` can contain _optional_ properties

    A. True

    B. False

5.  Which statement below is valid for defining an optional property in an `interface`?

    A. `middleName: string?;`

    B. `middleName?: string;`

    C. `optional middleName: string;`

    D. `middleName: optional string;`

[Quiz Answers](./11-ans.md)

[Next](./12.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./10.md)
