# Project Setup

Now that Node, NPM, and TypeScript are installed, follow the instructions below to create a project that will be used to play around with different TypeScript code examples. As you work through this lesson, please, add the code to this project so you can see what it accomplishes yourself. Follow the steps below to create the necessary folders and files.

1. Open up your command prompt/terminal.
2. Run the following to navigate to your Desktop

```shell
cd Desktop
```

3. Next, navigate to the FullStackWeb directory in your terminal.

```shell
cd FullStackWeb
```

_You created this folder in your Front-End Foundations course. If you do not have this folder follow the directions below._

- Create a root folder on your desktop and name it `FullStackWeb`.

```shell
mkdir FullStackWeb
```

- Next, navigate to the FullStackWeb directory in your terminal.

```shell
cd FullStackWeb
```

4. Create a new folder within your `FullStackWeb` folder and name it `FEFAngular`. (This folder will hold all your coursework for this course)

```shell
mkdir FEFAngular
```

5. Then, navigate to the `FEFAngular` directory in your terminal.

```shell
cd FEFAngular
```

Great! Now you have a folder to house all of the projects for this course. Remember to create projects when asked and make sure they live in this folder!

Now, you will create a folder for this lesson below.

1. Create a new project folder named `AngularL01` located within the `FEFAngular` folder in your terminal.

```shell
mkdir AngularL01
```

Once the process is complete, navigate into the AngularL01 directory:

```shell
cd AngularL01
```

Run the following to open your new project in VS Code (or you can open the folder within VS Code directly):

```shell
code .
```

- Once Visual Studio is open you can close the terminal and use the integrated terminal that is built into VSCode by using the following shortcut on both Mac and Windows:

```shell
Ctrl `
```

- - The backtick key is located to the left of the number one and below the escape key on most keyboards. Press the Ctrl and the backtick keys at the same time.

4. Create a new file called package.json and add the following code.

**package.json** file:

```json
{
  "name": "typescript-sandbox",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "a sandbox for testing TypeScript code",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "tsc && node index.js"
  }
}
```

- The most important part of the code above is the `start` script. It is going to run `tsc` in the terminal first, and then it is going to run `node index.js`. **tsc** stands for **TypeScript Compiler** which will take any file that ends with `.ts` or `.tsx` and compile it into JavaScript. The `tsc` is going to output a file with the same name and a `.js` extension in the same directory as the `.ts` version. Once `tsc` has finished, the script will then continue to run the code within the `index.js` file using node.

5. Create a new file called index.ts. Notice that the file extension is .ts, which stands for TypeScript. This type of file will need to be compiled into JavaScript before it is understood by a browser, or, in this case, the node server. Inside the file add the following code.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
const somethingFun: string = "Riding my bike is fun!";
console.log(somethingFun);
```

- Do not worry about understanding the code above for the time being. This code is merely a placeholder to verify that the project is behaving.

6. Next, create the TypeScript config file named `tsconfig.json`. This file can be generated by typing the following command in the terminal (make sure you are in the integrated terminal):

```shell
tsc --init
```

- Open the file, and you will be greeted with a large number of options. For now, do not change this file at all. Instead, take some time to look over some of the options that can be used when the TypeScript Compiler runs.

7. The last step, is to run the code by typing npm start in the terminal:

```shell
npm start
```

- This will generate a file called `index.js` and then immediately run that file using `node`.
  The terminal will then print the following:

```
Riding my bike is fun!
```

After running `npm start`, the TypeScript code is compiled into JavaScript. Open the `index.js` file and take a minute to look at the differences between the `.ts` and `.js` file. These differences will be explained shortly.

You now have everything you need to compile and run TypeScript code! Continue to the next page to get started. As you test the examples in VSCode use `npm start` anytime you want to _execute the code_.

[Next](./5.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./3.md)
