# Static Typing - Continued

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/304904262.hd.mp4?s=e697930fdf9ca9d7974da7f1ea0abe0a9dd94046&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Types Examples

Now that you have been introduced to TypeScript `types`, below are some examples that show how these common `types` are written in TypeScript. The `variables` below have `type declarations` that are specifying the `type` to be used by the `variable`. If the value changed, it would need to correspond to the type specified.

### Try It!

Throughout these examples, copy and paste the code into your `index.ts` file, and then feel free to test and change it as you learn more.

## Add Types to Variables Example

The code below shows three different variables: `sandwich`, `orderNumber`, and `delicious`. Each variable has a different type: `string`, `number` and `boolean`, respectively.

**index.ts** file:

```ts
const sandwich: string = "BLT"; // string
const orderNumber: number = 1738; // number
const delicious: boolean = true; // boolean
```

- Above, the types are defined after the variable name. To define a type, write the variable name, include a colon (`:`) after the variable name, and finally, include the type needed for that variable.

## Add Types to Functions Example

The same principle can be applied to functions as well. You can not only apply a `type declaration` to the parameters of the function, but the `return value` of the function itself.

Consider the function below:

**index.ts** file:

```ts
function orderFood(sandwich: string, orderNumber: number): void {
  console.log(
    "Your order number is " +
      orderNumber +
      " and contains a " +
      sandwich +
      " sandwich"
  );
}

orderFood("Ham & Cheese", 32);
```

- First, the function is defined by the `function` keyword and is named `orderFood`.
- Next, the `parameters` are defined within the parenthesis `()`. There are two parameters defined: `sandwich` and `orderNumber`.
- - Each parameter has a type defined: `sandwich` is of type `string`, and `orderNumber` is of type `number`.
- Third, after the `parameters`, the `type` of the function is defined as `void`.
- - The syntax `: void` is located after the parenthesis that holds the `parameters` and before the curly brackets `{}`.
    In this case, the function does not return anything except for a console.log, so the type is void.
    console.log itself does not have a type of anything, which is why the function is returning a type of void.
    Lastly, there is a console.log which sends a message to the console including both of the parameters.
    Because TypeScript is compiled down to JavaScript, the types are removed. Be sure to add the function above and function call into your index.ts file, save the file, and run npm start. Once you have done that, two things should happen: you should see the message from the console.log, and the index.js file has been compiled. Open the index.js file, and you will see the following.

index.js file:

'use strict';
function orderFood(sandwich, orderNumber) {
console.log('Your order number is ' + orderNumber + ' and contains a ' + sandwich + ' sandwich');
}
orderFood('Ham & Cheese', 32);
The comparison between the two files is shown below:

functionsFigure 1-3: Functions

And within your command prompt/terminal, you should see the message from the console.log, as shown below:

[Next](./7.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./6.md)
