# Type Assertion

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/304904638.hd.mp4?s=ff6d7b4cef23556cce103e13695899131ce5daa1&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

`Type assertion` allows you to define the **type** of the data officially. When the compiler reads your TypeScript code, it cannot assume anything; it knows the type that is expected. Type assertion is essentially an explicit _typecasting_. So when the compiler doesn't know the type, you can use type assertion to define how it should be cast.

Below is an example that gives you an error when you run the code:

```ts
var fred = {};
fred.age = 57; // Error: property 'age' does not exist on `{}`
fred.name = "Fred Wilkenson"; // Error: property 'name' does not exist on `{}`
```

- Above, there is an empty object named fred. The following two lines are trying to give values to properties that do not exist within the object, so you get an error.
  The way to override this assumption is by defining an `interface` and giving `fred` a **type assertion** by using the `as` keyword, as shown below:

```ts
interface Person {
  age: number;
  name: string;
}
const fred = {} as Person;
fred.age = 57;
fred.name = "Fred Wilkenson";
```

Now when you run the code, the properties `age` and `name` will have their respective values.

You can also use `type assertion` by using the `<>` syntax, as shown below:

```ts
const personName: any = "Fred Wilkenson";

const fredName = <string>personName;
```

Above, the `personName` variable has a type of `any`. It is then overwritten to be a `string` set to the variable `name`.

**Additional Info!**
If you would like to read more about Type Assertion, please visit: [TypeScript Deep Dive - Type Assertion](https://basarat.gitbooks.io/typescript/docs/types/type-assertion.html).

## Review Quiz

1.  JavaScript is a strongly-typed language.

    A. True

    B. False

2.  Using TypeScript, you will get an error if you do not define the type of a variable.

    A. True

    B. False

3.  In the `tsconfig.json` file, if the `strictNullChecks` flag is missing or set to _off_, **null** can be assigned to variable data types like _strings_ and _numbers_.

    A. True

    B. False

4.  Which of the following is not a valid type is TypeScript?

    A. True

    B. False

    C. Dictionary

    D. String

    E. All are valid types

5.  Which is the correct way to assign a type to a variable?

    A. `string name = "bob";`

    B. `var name: string = "bob";`

    C. `var name = string = "bob";`

    D. `string: name = "bob";`

6.  If you declare the type of a variable as a _string_ but assign it a numeric value, it will automatically re-declare the type as a _number_.

    A. True

    B. False

7.  Using TypeScript, types can be declared for both function parameters and the function's return value.
    A. True

    B. False

8.  Typecasting is the process of converting from one type to another.
    A. True

    B. False

9.  `myNumber.toString()` is a valid example of typecasting from a number to a string.

    A. True

    B. False

10. Is the following function definition valid?

    A. Yes

    B. No

```ts
function addTwo(val1: number, val2: number): number {
  return (val1 + val2).toString();
}
```

11. Which of the following is an invalid type assertion?

    A. `const obj = {} as MyObject;`

    B. `var myNum: number = myString as number;`

    C. `var myString = myNum;`

    D. All are valid

[Quiz Answers](./9-ans.md)

[Next](./10.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./8.md)
