# Lesson 1 Hands-On

## 45 points

## Directions

For you Lesson 1 Hands-On, you will be working with your new knowledge of static typing and interfaces. In this Hands-On exercise you will create a project which will test your newly acquired knowledge of programming interfaces. This Hands-On will be graded, so be sure you complete all requirements.

**Caution!**
Do not submit your project until you have completed all requirements, as you will not be able to resubmit.

**Setup**

1. Open up your terminal/command prompt.

2. Navigate to your desktop in your terminal:

```shell
cd Desktop
```

3. Next, navigate to the `FullStackWeb` directory in your terminal:

```shell
cd FullStackWeb
```

4. Then, navigate to the `FEFAngular` directory in your terminal:

```shell
cd FEFAngular
```

5. Create a new project folder named `L01HandsOn` located within the `FEFAngular` folder in your terminal:

```
mkdir L01HandsOn
```

6. Once the process is complete, navigate into the `L01HandsOn` directory:

```shell
cd L01HandsOn
```

7. Run the following to open your new project in VS Code (or you can open the folder within VS Code directly):

```shell
code .
```

8. Create a file named `package.json` and add the following code:

```json
{
  "name": "L01HandsOn",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "lesson 1 hands on for the Angular course",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "tsc && node index.js"
  }
}
```

9. Create a file named `index.ts`

10. Within your command prompt/terminal (make sure you are within the L01HandsOn directory), run the following to create a tsconfig.json file:

```shell
tsc --init
```

11. Run `npm start` to create the index.js file.

## Requirements

1. Create an interface called `Person` that contains the following properties

- a `firstName` property of type string that is required.
- an optional `lastName` property of type string.

2. Create a second interface named `Contact` that contains the following properties:

- a `phoneNumber` property of type number that is required.
- an optional `email` property of type string.

3. Create a class named `ContactCard` that implements both the `Person` and `Contact` interfaces.
4. Add a constructor to the `ContactCard` class that uses both the `firstName` and `phoneNumber` fields.

- Don't forget to define the types of `firstName` and `phoneNumber` within `ContactCard`.

5. Add a method named `sendMessage` to the `ContactCard` class.
6. Add a `console.log` to the `sendMessage` method that sends a message to the console that uses `firstName` and `phoneNumber`.
7. Create a new instance of `ContactCard` and set it to the variable name of `newPerson`.

- Define the `firstName` and `phoneNumber` fields as "Henry" and "1234567890"

8. Using the `newPerson` instance, call the `sendMessage` method.
