# CSS Syntax

Writing a CSS rule follows a specific format.

There are three different ways to style an element.

The first way of styling is using the style attribute. When using this attribute, it will only style that specific element. There are three parts to the style attribute: the attribute's name, the property you are defining, and the value. The property will define what you want to change and the value will define how you change the element. Remember, the attribute always goes in the opening tag. See below:

Style Attribute diagram ImageFigure 4-1: Style Attribute

Above, you are using the color property in CSS. That property will change the color of the text it is targeting. You will be learning more CSS properties during this lesson and the next.

Below is what it will look like in your HTML code and how it will look on your site:

<body>
 <p style="color: blue;">This is a styled paragraph</p>
</body>
This is a styled paragraph

The second way of styling using CSS is to use the <style> HTML element. Using this method of styling is when the CSS selector comes into play. The CSS selector is how you target the element you want to style. The property and the value you saw in the style attribute will look identical, except for the fact that the property-value pair will now live within curly braces. When using the <style> element, if the selector is p, it will target all <p> tags throughout that specific HTML file. Consider the following diagram:

Selector diagram ImageFigure 4-2: CSS Selector

Above, you are selecting all <p> tags in the project. Notice how it only targets using the 'p' and doesn’t include the < >. Next, the property you are using is color, and the value of the property is blue. So, it is targeting all p tags in that file and changing the text to blue. Below is what it would look like in the HTML file:

<body>
  <p>This is blue</p>
  <style>
    p {
      color: blue;
    }
  </style>
</body>
Now all your <p> elements will look like this:

This is blue!

Be sure to terminate each property-value pair with a semicolon ;, as you can have multiple property-values when targeting one element.

Now, look at how to style within an external CSS file, this will seem very similar to how you would style using the <style> element file, but there are a couple of differences. The CSS styling will now NOT be within a <style> element, as HTML elements are not valid code in a CSS file. It will style that element throughout the entire project. Consider the code below.

HTML:

<body>
  <p>This is another example</p>
</body>
CSS:

p {
color: blue;
}
Outcome:

This is another example

Even though there are three different ways to style elements, it is preferred and extremely common to only have CSS styling in a separate styling sheet (.css) and to not use any HTML inline styling.
