# Basic Properties and Values (Continued)

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/292645974.hd.mp4?s=bac05d8725d3ae910ebf97482388bc86a1b5b7b6&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Font Size
Earlier in this lesson, you learned how to change the color of text.

Now, what if you want to make the text bigger? Yes, you can use the <h1> tag which will make the text quite big, but what if you want it even bigger? You can use the font-size property. Consider below:

div {
font-size: 40px;
}
The value to the font-size property is 40px. px stands for pixels and is used for setting the font size of an element. By using px you are defining how many pixels on the page that element should take up.

Another way of setting the font-size property is using em. em stands for ephemeral unit and is dynamic, which means it will change based on other things. If you haven't already set the font-size in pixels, the default em size is 16px. So 1 em= 16px. The number used will be multiplied by the set pixels. This means if 1em = 16px, then 2em = 32px and so on. You do not have to use whole numbers when using em. If the text-size is 16px and you want it to be 12px, you can use 0.75em instead because 12/16 = 0.75. You can use the code above, where you have defined the font-size to be 40px but now you want it to be 80px. All you need to do is use 2em and it will set it to 80px automatically.

div {
font-size: 2em;
}
Using em is beneficial when you start worrying about how your site will look on a smaller device, like a phone or tablet.

Additional Info!
If you would like to learn more about font-size and what you can do with it, please visit: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-size

Font Weight
Changing the weight of a font is accomplished with the font-weight property, this allows a font to appear bolder than other fonts based on the value set.

There are two types of values you can set to the font-weight property: a keyword value or a number value.

The most common keyword values are:

lighter

normal

bold

bolder

And the numeric values are:

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

In your code it would look like this:

p {
font-weight: bolder;
}
div {
font-weight: 100;
}
Any paragraph elements would look like this.

And any div elements would look like this.

Additional Info!
If you would like to explore more about font-weight, please visit: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/font-weight.

[Next](./5.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./3.md)
