# Selectors

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293010123.hd.mp4?s=afb0e1585a62896e72f26ea7b6352b49c93fb62b&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In CSS, selectors are used in choosing the HTML element that you want to apply styling to. So far, you have reviewed how to select elements using the element name. But that’s not the only way to select items in your HTML.

What if you wanted to select a specific <p> element without selecting ALL <p> tags? This scenario is where class and id can be beneficial. They are both global attributes that you can add to any HTML element. See below:

<body>
  <p id="paragraph1">This is a paragraph element with an id of "paragraph1"</p>
</body>
The id attribute has been added just like you would with any other attribute. When using class and id, the value of the attribute can be whatever you would like. It is beneficial to give the attribute a name that relates to what it is doing.

To write a rule that applies to an id in your CSS file, a hash symbol (#) is used in front of the rule name. For a class, a period (.) is used at the start of the name. As you have already learned in this lesson, you use just the element's name in the CSS file when selecting by element. Consider the following HTML and CSS snippets:

HTML:

<body>
  <p id="container">I am a paragraph with an id of "container"</p>
  <p class="leftColumn">I am a paragraph with a class of "leftColumn"</p>
  <div>I'm a lonely div element</div>
</body>
CSS:

/_ selects an element with an id called container _/
#container {
color: green;
}

/_ selects an element with a class called leftColumn _/
.leftColumn {
color: red;
}

/_ selects the div element _/
div {
color: orange;
}
Tip!
The /\* \*/ you see in the example above is a block comment. This allows you to place notes within your code that the user will not see, but may be helpful for someone reading your files.

Above, there is an id selector named "container", a class selector named "leftColumn" and a div element selector. So, any element in the HTML file with its id attribute set to "container" will have the color green applied to its font. Any element that has its class attribute set to "leftColumn" will have the color red applied to its font. And, finally, any text inside a div tag will have its color set to orange. The output of the above code will be:

I am a paragraph with an id of "container"

I am a paragraph with a class of "leftColumn"

I'm a lonely div element
