# Your First Script

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/234929944.hd.mp4?s=c8353cb98d8e31d18f6489a7ec9fdc8e6e73c133&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

There are two ways to write JavaScript:

- Inside of a `<script>` element directly embedded within the HTML file
- Linking a `<script>` element to an external JavaScript file which contains the code

This is similar to what you learned in the CSS lessons. You learned that you are able to add styles by putting the CSS in a `<style>` element or use a `<link>` to an external CSS file. With JavaScript, you only use the `<script>` tag for both.

When writing inline, meaning any lines of code added to the body, your JavaScript code must go within a `<script>` element. This `<script>` element can go inside either the `<head>` or `<body>` of your document, though typically it's good to start by putting it at the end of your `<body>`. See the code below.

**index.html** file:

```html
<body>
  <p>Some paragraph element here.</p>
  <p>
    <script>
      Your JavaScript code will go here
    </script>
  </p>
</body>
```

When you want to link to an external JavaScript file, it differs slightly from how you would connect to a CSS file. First, the position of the `<script>` tag should typically be at the bottom of the `<body>` element. This has to do with when we want a script to load versus when we want our styles to load. With our CSS it makes sense to load the styles as soon as possible so that as the page is rendered the coloring and format are correct. If the `<link>` element that pointed to your CSS file was at the end of the body, then the page would render first and the proper formatting would be applied after. This would create a very awkward experience for the user of your page. They would first see the browser default coloring and text, then their screen would suddenly jump to the correct styling.

However, with JavaScript we want our scripts to execute after all the elements have rendered. This is because JavaScript will often use elements within the document as part of its process. If our JavaScript tried to execute before the elements were rendered on the page, we would encounter errors.

Another difference between linking CSS files and linking JavaScript files are the tags and attributes we use. For CSS styles we use the href attribute on the `<link>` tag to specify the .css file. However, with JavaScript we use the src attribute on the `<script>` tag to specify the .js file. Below, you can see an example of linking to an external JavaScript file named 'app.js'. Notice how it differs from linking a CSS file.

index.html file:

```html
<body>
  <script src="app.js"></script>
</body>
```

Tip!
Keep in mind when creating a JavaScript file, it must have the .js extension so the text editor reads it as JavaScript code.

## Alert in JavaScript

Here is your first line of JavaScript code! You will be using the alert function for your first example. This JavaScript function allows you to 'alert' the user with a popup window that displays a custom message over the screen. Below, is an example of what an alert might look like in this HTML using the `<script>` element:

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Alerting you!</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <script>
      alert("Hello, World!");
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

The script tag informs the web browser to process anything written within the tags as JavaScript code and not HTML. When the alert function is called a window is loaded, and the text inside the () is displayed.

That's all it takes to pop-up a message to the screen. Great job!

Later in this course you will be learning how to move this JavaScript code into its own file and link to it.
