# Data Types (Continued)

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293485844.hd.mp4?s=1dbaa6369e833581981aa1d6482b8976b93ce2f8&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Variables

Now that you understand the types of data, it is time to explore what variables are. In programming, you shuffle data and values around to accomplish specific tasks. This data or value has to be stored somewhere so you can access it when needed. Think of variables as containers that hold values which are used throughout the rest of the JavaScript code. You define variables using the keyword var and give the variable a name that can be reused. Below, is an example of declaring a variable named excited and setting it to a string:

```js
var excited = "I am so excited to be learning about JavaScript!";
```

You can name the variable whatever you would like as long as it starts with a letter. A variable name is case-sensitive and is made up of only letters, numbers, and underscores. It is helpful to set the variable name to something that describes the data it will contain. This way, when you are looking at the variables, you know what they are doing with just a glance of the variable name.

You can also declare a variable without setting any initial data to it. To set its value later you use the name of the variable without the var keyword and assign the value. See below:

```js
var puppy;

//later on in this code, you can set puppy to some data
puppy = "Spot";
```

As you continue through the course, you will learn how this can be very valuable.

Now that you understand what a variable is, it is time to explore in depth how to set variables to different types.

[Next](./9.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./7.md)
