# I/O Devices

I/O Devices

Non-shiny new X220 keyboard. Authored by: Kai Hendry, License: CC BY 2.0
I/O refers to input and output —the manner in which data is received into a computer system and the manner in which information and the results of processing are provided to the user.

Users interact with computers through input and output (I/O) devices. Of all the computer hardware components, I/O devices have the most direct impact on a user’s computing experience. To accommodate a wide variety of data and the many environments in which data is processed, there are literally hundreds of different input devices on the market.

By learning about input devices, you also learn what computers are capable of. Output devices connect directly with our senses. Although most output from a computer is visual, much is auditory and some more exotic devices even affect our other senses. Personal computers typically use only a handful of I/O devices. Nearly everyone is familiar with the keyboard, mouse, display, and printer. More recent product designs present new methods of input. Touch pads and multi-touch displays make it simple to navigate the interfaces of mobile devices. Speech recognition systems like Siri, with audible responses, make it possible to interact with devices without touching a thing or looking at a display.

Professional environments sometimes require specially designed input devices in order to capture data more directly. From drawing tablets used by graphic artists, to magnetic ink character readers used by banks, to barcode readers used at the supermarket, a variety of input devices have been designed to accommodate the unique needs of professionals.

In addition to input and output devices, many computers accommodate other types of devices, such as wireless adapters and external storage. Many different types of devices can be connected to computers and mobile devices to expand their capabilities. One example is a sensor that can be connected to an iPhone to test food for allergens. The ability to increase the capabilities of a computer system by connecting external devices, referred to as peripherals, is called expansion.

Input Device
Input Devices

No input - Arcanebolt. Authored by Rosa Menkman, License :CC BY 2.0
An input device assists in capturing and entering data into a computer system.

Getting data into a computer system rapidly and accurately is the purpose of input devices. Some activities have very specific needs for input, requiring devices that perform specific functions.

For example, many reporters use digital recorders to record and transcribe human speech to ease the stress of typing late-breaking stories. The more specialized the application, the more specialized the associated I/O device. Self-checkout systems include many input devices such as touch screens, keypads, bar code scanners, sensors, and scales.

Different types of input devices are designed to accept different types of data. Human-readable data can be directly read and understood by humans. A sheet of paper containing lists of customers is an example of human-readable data. In contrast, machine-readable data is read by computer devices. Customer data that is stored on a disk is an example of machine-readable data. It is possible for data to be both human-readable and machine-readable. For example, people and computer systems can both read the scantron sheets used for some multiple-choice exams.

Regardless of how data gets into the computer, it is important that it be captured near its source to avoid data entry errors. Source data automation involves automating data entry where the data is created, thus ensuring accuracy and timeliness. Source data automation is used by librarians who use scanners to check out and check in library materials. Rental-car companies use automated scanners that scan vehicles as they exit and enter the rental lot. The scanner collects data on the vehicle, including gas gauge data, mileage, date, and time, and prepares a customer invoice before the customer returns to the counter.

Input devices can be classified as either general-purpose or special-purpose. A general-purpose input device is designed to be used for a wide variety of computing activities. This category of I/O devices includes keyboards and mice.

A special-purpose input device is designed for one unique purpose. An example of a special-purpose input device is the pill-sized camera from Given Imaging, called the PillCam, which, when swallowed, records images of the stomach and the small intestine as it passes through the digestive system.

General-Purpose Input Device
A general-purpose input device is an input device that is designed to be used for a wide variety of computing activities.

Many computing activities across platforms have common input needs. For example, many computer devices require a way in which to input characters and to select items on the display. For these purposes, a keyboard and pointing device are ideal. There are many different variations of these two common general-purpose input devices. On mobile devices, input is typically accepted through touch screen and voice commands.

QWERTY keyboards, named after the first five characters used in the keyboard’s design, are alphanumeric data entry devices used on all types of personal computers as well as mobile devices. They provide fast, one-character-at-a-time input for users with keyboarding skills. Some variations on the traditional QWERTY keyboard are available, including Microsoft’s ergonomic keyboard, which was designed to reduce the risk of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). Soft keyboards (or software keyboards) provide a picture of a keyboard for typing on touch-sensitive displays. They are used primarily on tablet computers and smartphones. Some people have difficulty typing on soft keyboards due to the lack of tactile feedback. Soft keyboards also take up valuable screen real estate. External keyboards can be connected to tablets to make typing easier and to reclaim screen space.

Several types of pointing devices are used to select objects on a display. A mouse is used on desktop and laptop PCs to move the mouse pointer on the display. On laptop PCs, a touch pad can be used in place of a mouse. On devices with touch screens, a pointing device isn’t necessary since the user simply touches the display to select items.

Touch screens used on some smartphones, tablets, and kiosks, allow the user to select items on the screen by touching them directly with a finger or stylus—a pen-like device. Some touch screens support handwriting recognition, enabling the user to write letters or words on the display with a stylus and automatically translating them into ASCII characters through the use of artificial intelligence.

Multi-touch displays allow the user to use two, three, or up to all 10 fingers on a touch display to manipulate objects on the display. For example, two fingers moving apart on the screen causes an object to zoom in, the opposite motion zooms out, and a twisting motion rotates an object.

Microphones serve as yet another general-purpose input device. Microphones can take human speech as input, digitize the sound waves, and use natural language processing to translate the input into dictated text that appears on the screen or into commands. Apple’s Siri, Google Now, Microsoft Cortana, and Amazon Alexa serve as AI-driven personal assistants to send messages, request information, schedule meetings, place phone calls, and complete other tasks.

Speech recognition software can also be used to take dictation, translating spoken words into text. Voice recognition, a similar technology, can be used by security systems to allow only authorized personnel into restricted areas.

Special-Purpose Input Device
Special Purpose Input Devices

Input devices. Authored by Marcin Wichary, License: CC BY 2.0
A special-purpose input device is designed to provide input for one specific type of activity. Many software applications require unique input devices to input specialized types of data in a convenient and reliable manner. The medical profession utilizes hundreds of such devices to collect biological information. Businesses use varying types of scanners to automate the collection of standardized information. Special-purpose input devices are available for nearly every industry and for many personal applications.

Video game enthusiasts enjoy specialized input devices that let them quickly react to game action. Most gamers prefer to use a game controller device to control game characters and objects; some games, such as flight simulators, are easier to navigate using a joystick, a device resembling a stick shift. The Nintendo Wii brought entirely new forms of input to gaming, utilizing motion sensors in handheld controllers to control gaming action, and with Wii U, a tablet controller with a second display. Microsoft developed Kinect, a motion-detecting controller for the Xbox that allows gamers to control game characters just by moving their body. The Kinect can also be used to control television programming with hand gestures and voice.

Leap Motion designed a gesture control input device that can be attached to a laptop computer. Games designed for smartphones make use of the built-in accelerometer, which allows for controlling game-play by holding the device at different angles. Guitar Hero and Rock Band video games make use of toy instruments that act as input devices to play virtual instruments in the game.

A digital camera can be connected to a PC or embedded in a laptop computer to provide photo and video input to the computer. A webcam is an inexpensive video camera that has become popular for video chat over the Internet. You can input both image and character data using a scanning device. Both page scanners and handheld scanners can convert monochrome or color pictures, forms, text, and other images into digital images. Biometric scanners and software can verify an individual’s identity by examining biological traits such as retinal or iris patterns, fingerprints, or facial features.

Businesses and organizations use a number of special-purpose scanners and optical readers to collect data. A magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) device reads special magnetic-ink characters such as those written on the bottom of checks.

Optical mark recognition (OMR) readers read “bubbled-in” forms commonly used in examinations and polling. Optical character recognition (OCR) readers read hand-printed characters. Point-of-sale (POS) devices are terminals or I/O devices connected to larger systems, with scanners that read codes on retail items and enter the item number into a computer system.

Card swipers are yet another way to collect data into a computer. Card swipers are used to verify the identity of individuals wishing to access secure locations. Card swipers are also used to facilitate credit card transactions. Devices from Square and PayPal allow smartphone users to use their phones as card swipers to conduct credit card transactions over the Internet. Wireless technologies such as near field communication (NFC) are beginning to replace card swipes. Using Google Wallet or Apple Pay, customers can swipe their smartphones across a receiver pad at checkout to pay for their purchases. This is an example of how output from one device can serve as input to another.
