# CSS Box Model (Continued)

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293273943.hd.mp4?s=275fb8e24b871f4d47318a01edb2ae0863fd2138&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## CSS Padding

The padding is the space between the content of the element and its border.

CSS Paddings for Individual Sides
The CSS padding properties allow you to set the padding area for an element that separates its border from its content. The padding is affected by the background-color of the box.

```css
h1 {
  padding-bottom: 10px;
}
article {
  padding-top: 20px;
  padding-left: 50px;
  background-color: cyan;
  border-style: solid;
}
```

The padding property is a shorthand property to avoid setting padding for each side of an element separately, i.e. padding-top, padding-right, padding-bottom, and padding-left.

```css
h1 {
  padding: 10px 20px;
}
nav {
  padding: 10px 15px 20px 25px;
}
```

The padding property can take one, two, three, or four whitespace separated values.

If one value is specified, this is applied to all the four sides.
If two values are specified, the first value is applied to the top and bottom, and the second value is applied to the right and left side.
If three values are specified, the first value is applied to the top, the second value is applied to left and right side and the last value is applied to the bottom.
If four values are specified, they are applied to the top, right, bottom, and the left side respectively in the specified order.
Tip!
Unlike CSS margin properties, values for padding properties cannot be negative. Like margin properties, percentage values for padding properties refer to the width of the generated boxes containing block.

## Width and Height of Elements

Usually, when you set the width and height of an element using CSS width and height properties, in reality, you are only setting the width and height of the content area of an element. The actual width and height of the element's box depend on several factors.

Using the image below you can see how the actual space that an element's box might take is calculated:

Box Model CalculationsFigure 5-3: Box Model Calculations

## Review

Below is a quiz to review the recently covered material. Quizzes are not graded.

[Next Lesson](./README.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./3.md)
