# If Statements (Continued)

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293659241.hd.mp4?s=088bc3a81d1092d316b97ee9760d071c8cc6d164&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Comparing vs. Setting

There are two versions of the "Equals" comparison operator. The first is the double equal sign (==). This operator will compare the values on either side of the operator to see if they are equal. If they are of two different data types then JavaScript will attempt to convert one of the values to the other data type and compare the values that way.

```js
5 == "5"; //This will return True.
```

The second form of the "Equals" comparison operator is referred to as the "Identical" operator. The "Identical" operator is three conjunctive equal signs (===). This version of the equals comparison operator will check for both value and data type.

```js
5 === "5"; //This will return False.
```

Now consider the following code:

```js
var puppy = "Spot";

if (puppy === "Spot") {
  alert("Hi Spot! You are so cute!");
}
```

Above, you are declaring the variable puppy and setting it to the name Spot. In the if statement, you are checking to see if puppy is identical in value and data type to the literal string “Spot”. If the result is true then an alert will happen.

Some other comparisons you might see throughout your exploration of if statements are the less than (<), greater than (>), less than or equal to (<=), and the greater than or equal to (>=). Below is an example of how you could use one of these comparisons:

```js
var age = 26;

if (age <= 30) {
  alert("You aren't THAT old!");
}
```

The code above is checking to see if the variable age is less than or equal to 30 and if that is true, an alert is triggered.

[Next Lesson](./README.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./3.md)
