# Displaying Content

<iframe width="420" height="315" src="https://player.vimeo.com/external/293242585.hd.mp4?s=d7cfbd58fb1011278e85221fddcc057373603f21&profile_id=175" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
Now that you understand the different properties that will make your site look more interesting, it is time to dive into how to control and place content throughout your site. Using the display property, you can control how a block of content is shown in the browser. Below are a few values that are used very frequently:

none - This property allows you to hide content. An element with none applied to it will not be visible to the user.
inline - Elements with inline applied are displayed side by side on the same line. They automatically wrap when they reach the end of the window.
block - Elements with block disrupt the flow of the elements around them. They typically take up the entire width of the window and stack vertically. It is like a paragraph <p>.
Consider the following HTML:

<p>I am the first paragraph.</p>
<p>I am the second paragraph.</p>
<p>I am the third paragraph.</p>
Normally, the above HTML will look like this on the page:

I am the first paragraph.

I am the second paragraph.

I am the third paragraph.

But when the display property with an inline value is added:

p {
display: inline;
}
The result will be:

I am the first paragraph. I am the second paragraph. I am the third paragraph.
Instead of the paragraphs being on top of each other, they are now wrapped on one line.

[Quiz Answers](./9-ans.md)

[Next](./10.md)

[Table of Contents](./README.md)

[Previous](./8.md)
