# Processors

Processors

smashed cpu. Authored by: fab:ian, License: CC BY 2.0
Processing carries out the instructions provided by software, using specially designed circuitry and a well-defined routine to transform data into useful outputs.

Processing is at the core of computing. Understanding how processors function can help users appreciate the abilities and limitations of computers and can be of great value when shopping for computers.

Digital devices process bits of data into useful information and services. The output from processing can include life-changing information, like the genetic code for human DNA, or it could be poll results for a presidential election, an entire 3D animated motion picture, a cell phone conversation, or the music you listen to on your way to class. Any type of output from a digital device is the result of processing.

New types of processors are released every year, each one more powerful than its predecessor. Processors are designed to excel in a particular type of activity. There are processors designed for computer graphics, for general-purpose personal computing, for artificial intelligence, for industrial use in mainframe computers, and for use in special-purpose computers like ebook readers, digital cameras, and medical equipment.

This section takes you on a tour of processors: how they work, what different types are available, and how they interact with other components in a computer to process data into information.

Central Processing Unit
The central processing unit (CPU) is a group of circuits that perform the processing in a computer, typically in one integrated circuit called a microprocessor.

The development of the CPU enabled computer engineers to further consolidate transistors from several chips and circuit boards to a single chip called a microprocessor. The CPU is a microprocessor that governs all actions that a computer of any type carries out. Over time, the number of transistors on a chip increased as technology enabled them to be produced on increasingly smaller scales. Processing became faster because electrons had shorter distances to travel. In the early 1970s, it became possible to fit all the circuitry needed for a computer on one chip. The CPU, or microprocessor, was born. The CPU is made up of many components. The quality of its components establishes the quality of the CPU. The following table lists the main components of a CPU along with their functions.

CPU Components
CPU Component Function
Control unit Sequentially accesses program instructions, decodes them, and coordinates the flow of data in and out of the ALU, the registers, RAM, and other system components, such as secondary storage, input devices, and output devices
SArithmetic/logic unit (ALU) Contains the millions of circuits created to carry out instructions, such as mathematical and logical operations
Registers Hold the bytes currently being processed
Cache A temporary storage area for frequently accessed or recently accessed data; speeds up the operation of the computer; size measured in megabytes (MB)
Clock speed Speed of the processor’s internal clock, which dictates how fast the processor can process data; usually measured in GHz (gigahertz, or billions of pulses per second)
Most of today’s computers use microprocessors that contain multiple CPUs, or cores. Multicore processors, such as dual core (two processors) and quad core (four processors), use an architecture that allows the cores to work together for faster processing. Intel has recently developed 3D processing technologies that allow multiple surfaces of circuits to be joined together in 3D connections.

Rather than a single plane of circuits, 3D processing utilizes processing cubes. CPU performance influences the quality of the device that it powers. No one enjoys waiting for information to be delivered. A state-of-the-art CPU can deliver information and services nearly instantaneously. For this reason, devices using top-of-the-line CPUs are more expensive than others with less powerful CPUs. Other components can also affect device performance, including size and type of RAM, bus speed, size and type of graphics processor and memory, and network bandwidth. Of these components, the processor has the greatest impact on quality and price.

Multiprocessing, also called parallel processing, is processing that occurs using more than one processing unit to increase productivity and performance. The most powerful computers in all categories rely on multiple processors working together to solve problems. From the Mac Pro PC, which can be configured with two 6-core processors, to China’s TaihuLight supercomputer, which has 10.65 million processing cores, multiprocessing defines ultimate processing power.

Motherboard
Motherboards

Motherboard. Authored by: Iwan Gabovitch, License: CC BY 2.0
The motherboard is the primary circuit board of a computer to which all components are connected, including the CPU.

The motherboard connects all of a computer’s components and enables them to communicate. Both general-purpose and special-purpose computers utilize motherboards.

Desktop PCs, laptop PCs, tablets, smartphones, smartwatches, servers, supercomputers, and almost all digital electronic devices have a motherboard that holds system components and allows outside devices to be connected to the system components. A typical personal computer motherboard includes a socket for the microprocessor, RAM, ROM, expansion slots, and many other components, along with electrical pathways called buses that connect the components.

There are different types of buses that connect different system components. The most important bus on a PC motherboard is the front-side bus, or FSB. On Intel processors, the FSB connects the CPU to the northbridge, a memory controller hub that controls access to RAM and graphics systems. The FSB feeds data and instructions to the CPU at least as quickly as the CPU can process those instructions. For that reason, FSB speed is important and is typically listed with the specifications of a computer.

The motherboard dictates the form factor of the system components. It may be small and tightly packed with components for tablets or smartphones. Or, it can be large and spacious with powerful components and advanced cooling systems.

Small, inexpensive motherboards containing entire computer systems and costing less than $40 have inspired a generation of makers and hackers.

Amateurs and professionals alike are using circuit boards from Arduino and Raspberry Pi to build all kinds of electronic gadgets from robots, to objects on the Internet of Things, to fully functional computers. They are also used as standard computers in poorer regions of the world where standard computers are too expensive to afford—just hook up a keyboard, mouse, and display and you’re ready to go!
