# Storage Devices

Storage Devices

Storage. Authored by Marcin Wichary, License: CC BY 2.0
In computing and digital technologies, storage refers to the ability to maintain data within the system temporarily or permanently.

Breakthroughs in storage technologies have empowered individuals to access information anywhere and anytime, easily share information with others, and maintain huge libraries of documents, music, photographs, movies, and other digital information—sometimes in a device no larger than a fingernail.

Storage technologies allow us to carry billions of bytes of data in our pockets to access anywhere, anytime.

Many different types of storage are available to support a wide variety of computing needs. From fast access RAM that supports today’s fastest processors to robotic-delivered magnetic tape cartridges storing petabytes in storage silos, storage is accessed at varying speeds. From ultra-portable micro SD cards and USB flash drives to optical CDs, DVDs, and Blu-ray discs, to huge terabyte hard drives accessed directly on a device or wirelessly in the cloud, storage has many forms and various capacities.

Storage devices and technologies vary in terms of access speed, capacity, portability, and price. Storage media that provide faster access speeds are generally more expensive than media that provide slower access.

The term storage device is used for the hardware that stores and retrieves data. The term storage media is used for the material on which the data is stored. A DVD drive is the storage device, and the DVD is the media where data is stored. In some cases, the device and media are considered one and the same, such as with USB drives and hard drives. RAM, random access memory, is also called primary storage because it is the main store for data being processed. Secondary storage refers to permanent storage that holds data without the need for electricity. Other forms of storage include ROM (read-only memory) and graphics memory.

Secondary storage can be classified as either sequential access, as in the case of tape, or direct access, as with disks. Methods of storage include magnetic storage, optical storage, and solid-state storage. A storage device may be located on the computer or device in use, in which case it is considered local storage; or it may be accessed over a network, in which case it is considered network storage. Data may also be stored on Internet servers, in which case it is called cloud storage. This section covers these technologies and shows the benefits and drawbacks of each.

System Storage
System Storage

aluminum MacBook memory upgrade. Authored by: blakespot, License: CC BY 2.0
System storage refers to storage used by a computer system in its normal operations, which includes RAM, ROM, and video memory.

The processor works hand-in-hand with system memory, from the moment a computer is turned on to the time it is powered off. System memory provides the instructions required to start the computer. Instructions and information is shuffled in and out of system memory as the processor runs software. Without system memory, the processor would not function.

Read-only memory (ROM) provides permanent storage for data and instructions that do not change, such as firmware—programs and data from the computer manufacturer, including the boot process used to start the computer. ROM stores data, using circuits with states that are fixed. Therefore, the data represented by this combination is not lost if the power is removed. ROM stores a program called the BIOS (basic input/output system). The BIOS stores information about your hardware configuration along with the boot program. The boot program contains the instructions needed to start up the computer. After running some system diagnostics, the boot program loads part of the operating system into RAM and turns over control of the processor to the operating system.

Random access memory (RAM) is temporary, or volatile, memory that stores bytes of data and program instructions for the processor to access. RAM acts as the primary storage area in a computer for software and the data that it works with. RAM plays a crucial role in computer systems and can contribute to or detract from a computer’s performance. Having too little RAM or using low-quality RAM that cannot deliver instructions quickly enough to the processor can cause a computer to drag. Typically, computer manufacturers install RAM in a computer to match the processor’s abilities. Today’s PC operating systems and software require at least 1 GB of RAM for minimal performance quality. Even the most basic computers today come with at least 4 GB of RAM.

RAM exists as a set of chips grouped together on a circuit board called a single in-line memory module (SIMM) or a dual in-line memory module (DIMM). Most of today’s PCs use DIMMs, which have a 64-bit data path—twice that of a SIMM. RAM DIMMs are inserted into slots in the motherboard near the processor. A new desktop computer typically comes with two or four RAM slots, half of which are occupied with DIMMs and half left available for future expansion. Laptop computers typically have two RAM slots. Tablet computers and smartphones have embedded RAM not designed for access by users.

Video memory, sometimes called video RAM, VRAM, or graphics memory, is used to store image data for a computer display in order to speed the processing and display of video and graphics images. Video memory and graphics processing provide important capabilities for today’s graphics-intensive computer systems. Microsoft Windows, Mac OS, and today’s demanding 3D computer games require high-capacity video memory and sophisticated graphics support to provide a rich and realistic graphics environment for work and play.

Magnetic Storage
Magnetic storage is a storage technology that uses the magnetic properties of iron oxide particles rather than electrical charges to store bits and bytes more permanently than RAM.

Data stored in a computer’s RAM is temporary and only available while the computer is powered on. Magnetically stored data lasts years, even decades, before deteriorating. Magnetic storage, in the form of a hard disk drive (HDD), provides an inexpensive, high-capacity form of permanent storage that acts as the main storage medium in most low-end desktop and laptop computers.

In magnetic storage, a surface is coated with a layer of particles that are organized into addressable regions (formatted). In the process of reading and writing data, a read/write head passes over the particles to determine, or set, the magnetic state of a given region. Two types of media use magnetic storage: disks and tapes.

Magnetic disks are thin steel platters. When reading data from or writing data onto a disk, the computer can go directly to the desired piece of data by positioning the read/write head over the proper track of the revolving disk. Thus, the disk is called a direct access storage medium.

Magnetic disk storage varies widely in capacity and portability. Fixed hard disk (hard drive) storage has large storage capacity—storing terabytes of data on many new laptop and desktop PCs. For these reasons, personal computers rely on the hard drive as the main secondary- storage medium. External hard drives connect to a computer through its USB port and provide a convenient extension to storage or a backup medium to safeguard data. With the price of solid -state drives (SSDs) dropping, many computer manufacturers are moving to SSDs over HDDs since they are much faster than HDDs at delivering data. All Apple MacBooks use SSDs.

Magnetic tape is used by businesses and organizations that need to store and back up large quantities of data. Similar to the kind of tape found in the old audio or video cassettes, magnetic tape is Mylar film coated with iron oxide particles. Magnetic tape is an example of a sequential access storage medium because data is written and read in sequential order from the beginning of the tape to the end. Although access is slower, magnetic tape is usually less expensive than disk storage. For applications that require access to very large amounts of data in a set order, sequential access is ideal. For example, government agencies, such as the U.S. Census Bureau, and large insurance corporations store large quantities of data on tape.

Businesses and organizations often provide large quantities of storage to employees over a network. Server computers can provide a central store for important corporate data for employees to share. Arrays of disks can be formed and used in groups to handle terabytes of data. A technology called a storage area network, or SAN, links many storage devices over a network and treats them as one huge disk. Cloud storage utilizes magnetic disk drives connected to Internet servers to make them accessible anywhere, anytime.

Optical Storage
Optical storage media, such as CDs, DVDs, and Blu-ray discs, store bits by using an optical laser to burn pits into the surface of a highly reflective disc.

Optical storage provides an extremely portable storage medium for quantities of data up to several gigabytes. Although it does not match the high capacity and data access rates of magnetic and solid-state storage, it is ideal for storing music, movies, photos, software, and data for mobile access and sharing.

The 1s and 0s stored on optical discs are read from the disc surface by using a low-power laser that measures the difference in reflected light as it passes over pits burned into the disc surface. Audio CDs that store music, data CDs that store software and computer files, and DVDs and Blu-ray discs that typically store motion pictures and high-def movies all use the same fundamental technology. See the table at the bottom of this page for more details.

The popularity of the CD and DVD rose with the Introduction of recordable optical discs. The process of writing to an optical disc is sometimes called burning. Manufacturers use R to indicate that a medium is recordable; that is, it can be written to only once. RW, for rewritable, is used to indicate that a disc can be rewritten numerous times just like a hard drive. Some new PCs come with a combination drive that functions as a CD and DVD burner. Some support Blu-ray as well. Most ultrabooks are so slim that there isn’t room for an optical disc drive.

Since users are increasingly accessing software, music, and movies from the cloud rather than from DVDs, the need for optical discs is diminishing. MacBooks and other super thin laptops have sacrificed their optical drives for a thinner body.

Users of these laptops that want to access optical discs must purchase an external device.

Optical Storage

Authored by Cengage Learning, License: CC BY 4.0
Optical Media
Media Description
CD A compact disc read-only memory (CD-ROM), commonly referred to as a CD, is an optical medium that stores up to 700 MB of data. CDs are used for music distribution, software distribution, and various forms of data storage.
DVD A digital video disc read-only memory (DVD-ROM) stores more than 4.7 GB of data in a fashion similar to CDs, except that DVDs can write and read much smaller pits on the disc surface and can sometimes write to and read from multiple disc layers. Unlike a CD, a DVD can store an entire digitized motion picture.
Blu-ray Blu-ray discs (BDs) make use of the shorter wavelength of blue light to read and write even smaller pits on the optical disc surface for higher capacity. Just as the DVD was developed primarily for motion picture distribution, Blu-ray was developed for high-definition movie distribution. A single-layer disc (25 GB) can hold a 135-minute high-definition movie and still have room for two hours of bonus material in standard definition. Two-layer discs storing 50 GB are available, and there is talk of 100 and 200 GB versions coming soon.
Solid-State Storage
Solid State Storage

Solid State Drive. Authored by: ericnvntr, License: CC BY 2.0
A solid-state storage device stores data using solid-state electronics such as transistors and, unlike magnetic and optical media, does not require any moving mechanical parts.

Magnetic storage devices have high capacity and are convenient in terms of read and write ability, but they have slow data access rates due to the use of mechanical moving parts. Optical storage media is convenient in terms of mobility but has limited storage capacity and is slow to write to.

Solid-state storage devices offer fast access times because they have no moving parts. They are also increasing in capacity and dropping in price each year and can store nearly as much as hard drives. As the cost of solid-state storage continues to decrease, it will continue to replace uses of magnetic storage on many devices.

Solid-state storage devices store data permanently without any moving parts or the need for electricity. Flash memory is a form of solid-state storage that updates (flashes) the data it holds in large blocks. Unlike other secondary storage, such as magnetic disks and tapes and optical CDs and DVDs, flash memory requires no moving parts to read and write data. It is therefore much faster and much quieter, requires less power, and produces less heat. Because of these significant benefits, solid-state storage looks to be the wave of the future. The slightly higher price of the technology is the only thing holding it back from replacing other forms of secondary storage; however, prices are rapidly dropping. Solid-state storage devices include flash memory cards, USB flash drives, and solid-state drives.

A flash memory card is a small chip encased in a plastic housing that stores data permanently without the need for power. Flash chips are small and can be easily modified and reprogrammed, which makes them popular in computers, smartphones, digital cameras, and other products. When used in devices such as digital cameras, camcorders, and digital music players, flash memory cards are sometimes referred to as media cards. Secure Digital (SD) cards, mini SD cards, and micro SD cards are popular flash memory cards for mobile phones, digital cameras, and other devices that need to store a lot of data in a tiny package.

A flash drive—also called a USB drive or thumb drive—is a small flash memory module about the size of your thumb or smaller that conveniently plugs into the USB port of a PC or other digital electronics device to provide convenient, portable, high-capacity storage. Although they are called drives, they contain no moving parts. A 64 GB flash drive can be purchased for around $15.

As flash drives grow in capacity and capability, they are threatening the future of magnetic hard drives as the first choice for secondary storage in PCs. Samsung produced the first solid-state discs (SSDs) using flash technology to replace the traditional magnetic hard drive in PCs. An SSD reads data 300 percent faster and writes data 150 percent faster than a traditional hard drive. It boots up a computer much faster, is lighter and more durable, uses less power, and runs cooler and quieter than a hard drive (in fact, it is silent). SSDs are being used in MacBooks, ultrabooks, and small, light sub-notebooks and are making their way into the mainstream market. SSDs are also used as the storage media for tablets, smartphones, and digital media players.

Cloud Storage
Cloud storage stores data on Internet servers for access from any Internet-connected device.

Cloud storage is fundamentally changing the way people use digital technologies. It offers important benefits, including the ability to store files and media in a single location for access from any location or device. Also, it makes it easy to share and collaborate on files. The drawback is that if you lose Internet connectivity, you may no longer have access to your files.

Cloud Storage

Authored: Courtesy of Microsoft Corporation, License: Fair Use
People are storing increasing amounts of data and information online. Photos are uploaded to Facebook, iCloud, or some other online service; movies and music are streamed from Netflix, iTunes, Amazon, or Google; email, calendar, and contacts are stored online; and more and more files are being stored on Microsoft OneDrive, iCloud, Google Drive, Dropbox, and other services.

A few years ago, the Internet was given a new catchy name: the cloud. The name comes from the use of a cloud image to represent the Internet on network diagrams. Many functions and services that used to be managed by local computers are now being managed by Internet servers in “the cloud.” Storage is among the most useful of those services.

The ability to store and access files and media from the cloud across all of your devices has eliminated the need to manually “sync” files between devices. It has also made sharing documents with others much easier. Several group members can edit a single document. Each person’s edits are marked for easy reference. Versioning features allow old versions of a document to be accessed.

Microsoft, Google, and Apple allow members generous amounts of storage space for documents. Cloud storage is an important consideration when choosing a technology ecosystem. The more files that are stored in the cloud, the more difficult it becomes to move them to a new cloud storage provider. This is especially true for media such as movies, music, and books.

The downside of cloud storage is that, usually, documents and media are not available unless you have access to the Internet. This can become a significant problem in underserved areas. The most popular cloud storage services now have tools that allow users to store copies of documents on their devices for access while offline. It is easy to imagine a time in the not-too-distant future when the idea of storing files on a device will be an unusual concept. Someday you will be telling your grandchildren about the old days, before the cloud, when files were stored on drives.
